Though conducted
with much brilliance and vigour by De Maistre, it is not his most
important nor remarkable contribution to thought.Before passing on to
that, it is worth while to make one remark.It will be inferred from De
Maistre's general position that he was no friend to physical science.Just as moderns see in the advance of the methods and boundaries of
physical knowledge the most direct and sure means of displacing the
unfruitful subjective methods of old, and so of renovating the entire
field of human thought and activity, so did De Maistre see, as his
school has seen since, that here was the stronghold of his foes.'Ah,
how dearly,' he exclaimed, 'has man paid for the natural sciences!'Not
but that Providence designed that man should know something about them;
only it must be in due order.The ancients were not permitted to attain
to much or even any sound knowledge of physics, indisputably above us as
they were in force of mind, a fact shown by the superiority of their
languages which ought to silence for ever the voice of our modern pride.Why did the ancients remain so ignorant of natural science?'When all Europe was Christian, when the priests
were the universal teachers, when all the establishments of Europe were
Christianised, when theology had taken its place at the head of all
instruction, and the other faculties were ranged around her like maids
of honour round their queen, the human race being thus prepared, then
the natural sciences were given to it.'Science must be kept in its
place, for it resembles fire which, when confined in the grates prepared
for it, is the most useful and powerful of man's servants; scattered
about anyhow, it is the most terrible of scourges.Whence the marked
supremacy of the seventeenth century, especially in France?From the
happy accord of religion, science, and chivalry, and from the supremacy
conceded to the first.The more perfect theology is in a country the
more fruitful it is in true science; and that is why Christian nations
have surpassed all others in the sciences, and that is why the Indians
and Chinese will never reach us, so long as we remain respectively as we
are.The more theology is cultivated, honoured, and supreme, then, other
things being equal, the more perfect will human science be: that is to
say, it will have the greater force and expansion, and will be the more
free from every mischievous and perilous connection.[9]

Little would be gained here by serious criticism of a view of this kind
from a positive point.How little, the reader will understand from De
Maistre's own explanations of his principles of Proof and Evidence.'They have called to witness against Moses,' he says, 'history,
chronology, astronomy, geology, etc.The objections have disappeared
before true science; but those were profoundly wise who despised them
before any inquiry, or who only examined them in order to discover a
refutation, but without ever doubting that there was one.Even a
mathematical objection ought to be despised, for though it may be a
demonstrated truth, still you will never be able to demonstrate that it
contradicts a truth that has been demonstrated before.'His final
formula he boldly announced in these words: '_Que toutes les fois qu'une
proposition sera prouvee par le genre de preuve qui lui appartient,
l'objection quelconque,_ MEME INSOLUBLE, _ne doit plus etre ecoutee._'
Suppose, for example, that by a consensus of testimony it were perfectly
proved that Archimedes set fire to the fleet of Marcellus by a
burning-glass; then all the objections of geometry disappear.Prove if
you can, and if you choose, that by certain laws a glass, in order to be
capable of setting fire to the Roman fleet, must have been as big as the
whole city of Syracuse, and ask me what answer I have to make to that.'_J'ai a vous repondre qu'Archimede brula la flotte romaine avec un
miroir ardent._'

The interesting thing about such opinions as these is not the exact
height and depth of their falseness, but the considerations which could
recommend them to a man of so much knowledge, both of books and of the
outer facts of life, and of so much natural acuteness as De Maistre.Persons who have accustomed themselves to ascertained methods of proof,
are apt to look on a man who vows that if a thing has been declared
true by some authority whom he respects, then that constitutes proof to
him, as either the victim of a preposterous and barely credible
infatuation, or else as a flat impostor.Yet De Maistre was no ignorant
monk.He had no selfish or official interest in taking away the
keys of knowledge, entering not in himself, and them that would
enter in hindering.The true reasons for his detestation of the
eighteenth-century philosophers, science, and literature, are simple
enough.Like every wise man, he felt that the end of all philosophy and
science is emphatically social, the construction and maintenance and
improvement of a fabric under which the communities of men may find
shelter, and may secure all the conditions for living their lives with
dignity and service.Then he held that no truth can be harmful to
society.If he found any system of opinions, any given attitude of the
mind, injurious to tranquillity and the public order, he instantly
concluded that, however plausible they might seem when tested by logic
and demonstration, they were fundamentally untrue and deceptive.What is
logic compared with eternal salvation in the next world, and the
practice of virtue in this?The recommendation of such a mind as De
Maistre's is the intensity of its appreciation of order and social
happiness.The obvious weakness of such a mind, and the curse inherent
in its influence, is that it overlooks the prime condition of all; that
social order can never be established on a durable basis so long as the
discoveries of scientific truth in all its departments are suppressed,
or incorrectly appreciated, or socially misapplied.De Maistre did not
perceive that the cause which he supported was no longer the cause of
peace and tranquillity and right living, but was in a state of absolute
and final decomposition, and therefore was the cause of disorder and
blind wrong living.FOOTNOTES:

[3] _Soirees de Saint Petersbourg_ (8th ed.[4] _Soirees de Saint Petersbourg, 6ieme entretien_, i.[5] _Ib._ (8th ed.[6] _Soirees_, i.76

[7] De Maistre found a curiously characteristic kind of support for this
view in the fact that evils are called _fleaux_: flails are things to
beat with: so evils must be things with which men are beaten; and as we
should not be beaten if we did not deserve it, _argal_, suffering is a
merited punishment.Apart from that common infirmity which leads people
after they have discovered an analogy between two things, to argue from
the properties of the one to those of the other, as if, instead of being
analogous, they were identical, De Maistre was particularly fond of
inferring moral truths from etymologies.He has an argument for the
deterioration of man, drawn from the fact that the Romans expressed in
the same word, _supplicium_, the two ideas of prayer and punishment
(_Soirees, 2ieme entretien_, i. p.His profundity as an
etymologist may be gathered from his analysis of _cadaver_: _ca_-ro,
_da_-ta, _ver_-mibus.[8] _Gibbon_, c. xlvi.[9] See the _Examen de la Philosophie de Bacon_, vol.58 _et seq._




III.When the waters of the deluge of '89 began to assuage, the best minds
soon satisfied themselves that the event which Bonaparte's restoration
of order enabled them to look back upon with a certain tranquillity and
a certain completeness, had been neither more nor less than a new
irruption of barbarians into the European world.The monarchy, the
nobles, and the Church, with all the ideas that gave each of them life
and power, had fallen before atheists and Jacobins, as the ancient
empire of Rome had fallen before Huns and Goths, Vandals and Lombards.The leaders of the revolution had succeeded one another, as Attila had
come after Alaric, and as Genseric had been followed by Odoacer.The
problem which presented itself was not new in the history of western
civilisation; the same dissolution of old bonds which perplexed the
foremost men at the beginning of the nineteenth century, had distracted
their predecessors from the fifth to the eighth, though their conditions
and circumstances were widely different.The practical question in both
cases was just the same--how to establish a stable social order which,
resting on principles that should command the assent of all, might
secure the co-operation of all for its harmonious and efficient
maintenance, and might offer a firm basis for the highest and best life
that the moral and intellectual state of the time allowed.There were
two courses open, or which seemed to be open, in this gigantic
enterprise of reconstructing a society.One of them was to treat the
case of the eighteenth century as if it were not merely similar to, but
exactly identical with, the case of the fifth, and as if exactly the
same forces which had knit Western Europe together into a compact
civilisation a thousand years before, would again suffice for a second
consolidation.Christianity, rising with the zeal and strength of youth
out of the ruins of the Empire, and feudalism by the need of
self-preservation imposing a form upon the unshapen associations of the
barbarians, had between them compacted the foundations and reared the
fabric of mediaeval life.Why, many men asked themselves, should not
Christian and feudal ideas repeat their great achievement, and be the
means of reorganising the system which a blind rebellion against them
had thrown into deplorable and fatal confusion?Let the century which
had come to such an end be regarded as a mysteriously intercalated
episode, and no more, in the long drama of faith and sovereign order.Let it pass as a sombre and pestilent stream, whose fountains no man
should discover, whose waters had for a season mingled with the mightier
current of the divinely allotted destiny of the race, and had then
gathered themselves apart and flowed off, to end as they had begun, in
the stagnation and barrenness of the desert.Philosophers and men of
letters, astronomers and chemists, atheists and republicans, had shown
that they were only powerful to destroy, as the Goths and the Vandals
had been.They had shown that they were impotent, as the Goths and the
Vandals had been, in building up again.Let men turn their faces, then,
once more to that system by which in the ancient times Europe had been
delivered from a relapse into eternal night.The minds to whom it
commended itself were cast in a different mould and drew their
inspiration from other traditions.In their view the system which the
Church had been the main agency in organising, had fallen quite as much
from its own irremediable weakness as from the direct onslaughts of
assailants within and without.The barbarians had rushed in, it was
true, in 1793; but this time it was the Church and feudalism which were
in the position of the old empire on whose ruins they had built.What
had once restored order and belief to the West, was now in its own turn
overtaken by decay and dissolution.To look to them to unite these new
barbarians in a stable and vigorous civilisation, because they had
organised Europe of old, was as infatuated as it would have been to
expect the later emperors to equal the exploits of the Republic and
their greatest predecessors in the purple.To despise philosophers and
men of science was only to play over again in a new dress the very part
which Julian had enacted in the face of nascent Christianity.The
eighteenth century, instead of being that home of malaria which the
Catholic and Royalist party represented, was in truth the seed-ground of
a new and better future.Its ideas were to furnish the material and the
implements by which should be repaired the terrible breaches and chasms
in European order that had been made alike by despots and Jacobins, by
priests and atheists, by aristocrats and sans-culottes.Amidst all the
demolition upon which its leading minds had been so zealously bent, they
had been animated by the warmest love of social justice, of human
freedom, of equal rights, and by the most fervent and sincere longing to
make a nobler happiness more universally attainable by all the children
of men.It was to these great principles that we ought eagerly to turn,
to liberty, to equality, to brotherhood, if we wished to achieve before
the new invaders a work of civilisation and social reconstruction, such
as Catholicism and feudalism had achieved for the multitudinous invaders
of old.Such was the difference which divided opinion when men took heart to
survey the appalling scene of moral desolation that the cataclysm of '93
had left behind.For if the
conscience of the Liberals was oppressed by the sanguinary tragedy in
which freedom and brotherhood and justice had been consummated, the
Catholic and the Royalist were just as sorely burdened with the weight
of kingly basenesses and priestly hypocrisies.If the one had some
difficulty in interpreting Jacobinism and the Terror, the other was
still more severely pressed to interpret the fact and origin and meaning
of the Revolution; if the Liberal had Marat and Hebert, the Royalist had
Lewis XV., and the Catholic had Dubois and De Rohan.Each school could
intrepidly hurl back the taunts of its enemy, and neither of them did
full justice to the strong side of the other.Yet we who are, in England
at all events, removed a little aside from the centre of this great
battle, may perceive that at that time both of the contending hosts
fought under honourable banners, and could inscribe upon their shields a
rational and intelligible device.Indeed, unless the modern Liberal
admits the strength inherent in the cause of his enemies, it is
impossible for him to explain to himself the duration and obstinacy of
the conflict, the slow advance and occasional repulse of the host in
which he has enlisted, and the tardy progress that Liberalism has made
in that stupendous reconstruction which the Revolution has forced the
modern political thinker to meditate upon, and the modern statesman to
further and control.De Maistre, from those general ideas as to the method of the government
of the world, of which we have already seen something, had formed what
he conceived to be a perfectly satisfactory way of accounting for the
eighteenth century and its terrific climax.The will of man is left
free; he acts contrary to the will of God; and then God exacts the
shedding of blood as the penalty.The only hope of
the future lay in an immediate return to the system which God himself
had established, and in the restoration of that spiritual power which
had presided over the reconstruction of Europe in darker and more
chaotic times than even these.Though, perhaps, he nowhere expresses
himself on this point in a distinct formula, De Maistre was firmly
impressed with the idea of historic unity and continuity.He looked upon
the history of the West in its integrity, and was entirely free from
anything like that disastrous kind of misconception which makes the
English Protestant treat the long period between St.Paul and Martin
Luther as a howling waste, or which makes some Americans omit from all
account the still longer period of human effort from the crucifixion of
Christ to the Declaration of Independence.The rise of the vast
structure of Western civilisation during and after the dissolution of
the Empire, presented itself to his mind as a single and uniform
process, though marked in portions by temporary, casual, parenthetical
interruptions, due to depraved will and disordered pride.All the
dangers to which this civilisation had been exposed in its infancy and
growth were before his eyes.First, there were the heresies with which
the subtle and debased ingenuity of the Greeks had stained and distorted
the great but simple mysteries of the faith.Then came the hordes of
invaders from the North, sweeping with irresistible force over regions
that the weakness or cowardice of the wearers of the purple left
defenceless before them.Before the northern tribes had settled in their
possessions, and had full time to assimilate the faith and the
institutions which they had found there, the growing organisation was
menaced by a more deadly peril in the incessant and steady advance of
the bloody and fanatical tribes from the East.And in this way De
Maistre's mind continued the picture down to the latest days of all,
when there had arisen men who, denying God and mocking at Christ, were
bent on the destruction of the very foundations of society, and had
nothing better to offer the human race than a miserable return to a
state of nature.As he thus reproduced this long drama, one benign and central figure was
ever present, changeless in the midst of ceaseless change; laboriously
building up with preterhuman patience and preterhuman sagacity, when
other powers, one after another in evil succession, were madly raging to
destroy and to pull down; thinking only of the great interests of order
and civilisation, of which it had been constituted the eternal
protector, and showing its divine origin and inspiration alike by its
unfailing wisdom and its unfailing benevolence.It is the Sovereign
Pontiff who thus stands forth throughout the history of Europe, as the
great Demiurgus of universal civilisation.If the Pope had filled only
such a position as the Patriarch held at Constantinople, or if there had
been no Pope, and Christianity had depended exclusively on the East for
its propagation, with no great spiritual organ in the West, what would
have become of Western development?It was the energy and resolution of
the Pontiffs which resisted the heresies of the East, and preserved to
the Christian religion that plainness and intelligibility, without which
it would never have made a way to the rude understanding and simple
hearts of the barbarians from the North.It was their wise patriotism
which protected Italy against Greek oppression, and by acting the part
of mayors of the palace to the decrepit Eastern emperors, it was they
who contrived to preserve the independence and maintain the fabric of
society until the appearance of the Carlovingians, in whom, with the
rapid instinct of true statesmen, they at once recognised the founders
of a new empire of the West.If the Popes, again, had possessed over the
Eastern empire the same authority that they had over the Western, they
would have repulsed not only the Saracens, but the Turks too, and none
of the evils which these nations have inflicted on us would ever have
taken place.[10] Even as it was, when the Saracens threatened the West,
the Popes were the chief agents in organising resistance, and giving
spirit and animation to the defenders of Europe.Their alert vision saw
that to crush for ever that formidable enemy, it was not enough to
defend ourselves against his assaults; we must attack him at home.The
Crusades, vulgarly treated as the wars of a blind and superstitious
piety, were in truth wars of high policy.From the Council of Clermont
down to the famous day of Lepanto, the hand and spirit of the Pontiff
were to be traced in every part of that tremendous struggle which
prevented Europe from being handed over to the tyranny, ignorance, and
barbarism that have always been the inevitable fruits of Mahometan
conquest, and had already stamped out civilisation in Asia Minor and
Palestine and Greece, once the very garden of the universe.This admirable and politic heroism of the Popes in the face of foes
pressing from without, De Maistre found more than equalled by their
wisdom, courage, and activity in organising and developing the elements
of a civilised system within.The maxim of old societies had been that
which Lucan puts into the mouth of Caesar--_humanum paucis vivit genus_.A vast population of slaves had been one of the inevitable social
conditions of the period: the Popes never rested from their endeavours
to banish servitude from among Christian nations.Women in old
societies had filled a mean and degraded place: it was reserved for the
new spiritual power to rescue the race from that vicious circle in which
men had debased the nature of women, and women had given back all the
weakness and perversity they had received from men, and to perceive that
'the most effectual way of perfecting the man is to ennoble and exalt
the woman.'The organisation of the priesthood, again, was a masterpiece
of practical wisdom.Such an order, removed from the fierce or selfish
interests of ordinary life by the holy regulation of celibacy, and by
the austere discipline of the Church, was indispensable in the midst of
such a society as that which it was the function of the Church to guide.Who but the members of an order thus set apart, acting in strict
subordination to the central power, and so presenting a front of
unbroken spiritual unity, could have held their way among tumultuous
tribes, half-barbarous nobles, and proud and unruly kings, protesting
against wrong, passionately inculcating new and higher ideas of right,
denouncing the darkness of the false gods, calling on all men to worship
the cross and adore the mysteries of the true God?Compare now the
impotency of the Protestant missionary, squatting in gross comfort with
wife and babes among the savages he has come to convert, preaching a
disputatious doctrine, wrangling openly with the rival sent by some
other sect--compare this impotency with the success that follows the
devoted sons of the Church, impressing their proselytes with the
mysterious virtue of their continence, the self-denial of their lives,
the unity of their dogma and their rites; and then recognise the wisdom
of these great churchmen who created a priesthood after this manner in
the days when every priest was as the missionary is now.Finally, it was
the occupants of the holy chair who prepared, softened, one might almost
say sweetened, the occupants of thrones; it was to them that Providence
had confided the education of the sovereigns of Europe.The Popes
brought up the youth of the European monarchy; they made it precisely in
the same way in which Fenelon made the Duke of Burgundy.In each case
the task consisted in eradicating from a fine character an element of
ferocity that would have ruined all.'Everything that constrains a man
strengthens him.He cannot obey without perfecting himself; and by the
mere fact of overcoming himself he is better.Any man will vanquish the
most violent passion at thirty, because at five or six you have taught
him of his own will to give up a plaything or a sweetmeat.That came to
pass to the monarchy, which happens to an individual who has been well
brought up.The continued efforts of the Church, directed by the
Sovereign Pontiff, did what had never been seen before, and what will
never be seen again where that authority is not recognised.Insensibly,
without threats or laws or battles, without violence and without
resistance, the great European charter was proclaimed, not on paper nor
by the voice of public criers; but in all European hearts, then all
Catholic Kings surrender the power of judging by themselves, and nations
in return declare kings infallible and inviolable.Such is the
fundamental law of the European monarchy, and it is the work of the
Popes.'[11]

All this, however, is only the external development of De Maistre's
central idea, the historical corroboration of a truth to which he
conducts us in the first instance by general considerations.Assuming,
what it is less and less characteristic of the present century at any
rate to deny, that Christianity was the only actual force by which the
regeneration of Europe could be effected after the decline of the Roman
civilisation, he insists that, as he again and again expresses it,
'without the Pope there is no veritable Christianity.'What he meant by
this condensed form needs a little explanation, as is always the case
with such simple statements of the products of long and complex
reasoning.In saying that without the Pope there is no true
Christianity, what he considered himself as having established was, that
unless there be some supreme and independent possessor of authority to
settle doctrine, to regulate discipline, to give authentic counsel, to
apply accepted principles to disputed cases, then there can be no such
thing as a religious system which shall have power to bind the members
of a vast and not homogeneous body in the salutary bonds of a common
civilisation, nor to guide and inform an universal conscience.In each
individual state everybody admits the absolute necessity of having some
sovereign power which shall make, declare, and administer the laws, and
from whose action in any one of these aspects there shall be no appeal;
a power that shall be strong enough to protect the rights and enforce
the duties which it has authoritatively proclaimed and enjoined.In free
England, as in despotic Turkey, the privileges and obligations which the
law tolerates or imposes, and all the benefits which their existence
confers on the community, are the creatures and conditions of a supreme
authority from which there is no appeal, whether the instrument by which
this authority makes its will known be an act of parliament or a ukase.This conception of temporal sovereignty, especially familiarised to our
generation by the teaching of Austin, was carried by De Maistre into
discussions upon the limits of the Papal power with great ingenuity and
force, and, if we accept the premisses, with great success.It should be said here, that throughout his book on the Pope, De Maistre
talks of Christianity exclusively as a statesman or a publicist would
talk about it; not theologically nor spiritually, but politically and
socially.The question with which he concerns himself is the utilisation
of Christianity as a force to shape and organise a system of civilised
societies; a study of the conditions under which this utilisation had
taken place in the earlier centuries of the era; and a deduction from
them of the conditions under which we might ensure a repetition of the
process in changed modern circumstance.In the eighteenth century men
were accustomed to ask of Christianity, as Protestants always ask of so
much of Catholicism as they have dropped, whether or no it is true.But
after the Revolution the question changed, and became an inquiry whether
and how Christianity could contribute to the reconstruction of society.People asked less how true it was, than how strong it was; less how many
unquestioned dogmas, than how much social weight it had or could
develop; less as to the precise amount and form of belief that would
save a soul, than as to the way in which it might be expected to assist
the European community.It was the strength of this temper in him which led to his extraordinary
detestation and contempt for the Greeks.Their turn for pure speculation
excited all his anger.In a curious chapter, he exhausts invective in
denouncing them.[12] The sarcasm of Sallust delights him, that the
actions of Greece were very fine, _verum aliquanto minores quam fama
feruntur_.Their military glory was only a flash of about a hundred and
fourteen years from Marathon; compare this with the prolonged splendour
of Rome, France, and England.In philosophy they displayed decent
talent, but even here their true merit is to have brought the wisdom of
Asia into Europe, for they invented nothing.Greece was the home of
syllogism and of unreason.'Read Plato: at every page you will draw a
striking distinction.As often as he is Greek, he wearies you.He is
only great, sublime, penetrating, when he is a theologian; in other
words, when he is announcing positive and everlasting dogmas, free from
all quibble, and which are so clearly marked with the eastern cast, that
not to perceive it one must never have had a glimpse of Asia.... There
was in him a sophist and a theologian, or, if you choose, a Greek and a
Chaldean.'The Athenians could never pardon one of their great leaders,
all of whom fell victims in one shape or another to a temper frivolous
as that of a child, ferocious as that of men,--'_espece de moutons
enrages, toujours menes par la nature, et toujours par nature devorant
leurs bergers_.'As for their oratory, 'the tribune of Athens would have
been the disgrace of mankind if Phocion and men like him, by
occasionally ascending it before drinking the hemlock or setting out for
their place of exile, had not in some sort balanced such a mass of
loquacity, extravagance, and cruelty.'[13]

It is very important to remember this constant solicitude for ideas that
should work well, in connection with that book of De Maistre's which
has had most influence in Europe, by supplying a base for the theories
of ultramontanism.Unless we perceive very clearly that throughout his
ardent speculations on the Papal power his mind was bent upon enforcing
the practical solution of a pressing social problem, we easily
misunderstand him and underrate what he had to say.A charge has been
forcibly urged against him by an eminent English critic, for example,
that he has confounded supremacy with infallibility, than which, as the
writer truly says, no two ideas can be more perfectly distinct, one
being superiority of force, and the other incapacity of error.[14] De
Maistre made logical blunders in abundance quite as bad as this, but he
was too acute, I think, deliberately to erect so elaborate a structure
upon a confusion so very obvious, and that must have stared him in the
face from the first page of his work to the last.If we look upon his
book as a mere general defence of the Papacy, designed to investigate
and fortify all its pretensions one by one, we should have great right
to complain against having two claims so essentially divergent, treated
as though they were the same thing, or could be held in their places by
the same supports.But let us regard the treatise on the Pope not as
meant to convince free-thinkers or Protestants that divine grace
inspires every decree of the Holy Father, though that would have been
the right view of it if it had been written fifty years earlier.It was
composed within the first twenty years of the present century, when the
universe, to men of De Maistre's stamp, seemed once more without form
and void.His object, as he tells us more than once, was to find a way
of restoring a religion and a morality in Europe; of giving to truth the
forces demanded for the conquests that she was meditating; of
strengthening the thrones of sovereigns, and of gently calming that
general fermentation of spirit which threatened mightier evils than any
that had yet overwhelmed society.From this point of view we shall see
that the distinction between supremacy and infallibility was not worth
recognising.Practically, he says, 'infallibility is only a consequence of supremacy,
or rather it is absolutely the same thing under two different names....
In effect it is the same thing, _in practice_, not to be subject to
error, and not to be liable to be accused of it.Thus, even if we should
agree that no divine promise was made to the Pope, he would not be less
infallible or deemed so, as the final tribunal; for every judgment from
which you cannot appeal is and must be (_est et doit etre_) held for
just in every human association, under any imaginable form of
government; and every true statesman will understand me perfectly, when
I say that the point is to ascertain not only if the Sovereign Pontiff
is, but if he must be, infallible.'[15] In another place he says
distinctly enough that the infallibility of the Church has two aspects;
in one of them it is the object of divine promise, in the other it is a
human implication, and that in the latter aspect infallibility is
supposed in the Church, just 'as we are absolutely bound to suppose it,
even in temporal sovereignties (where it does not really exist), under
pain of seeing society dissolved.'The Church only demands what other
sovereignties demand, though she has the immense superiority over them
of having her claim backed by direct promise from heaven.[16] Take away
the dogma, if you will, he says, and only consider the thing
politically, which is exactly what he really does all through the book.The pope, from this point of view, asks for no other infallibility than
that which is attributed to all sovereigns.[17] Without either
vindicating or surrendering the supernatural side of the Papal claims,
he only insists upon the political, social, or human side of it, as an
inseparable quality of an admitted supremacy.[18] In short, from
beginning to end of this speculation, from which the best kind of
ultramontanism has drawn its defence, he evinces a deprecatory
anxiety--a very rare temper with De Maistre--not to fight on the issue
of the dogma of infallibility over which Protestants and unbelievers
have won an infinite number of cheap victories; that he leaves as a
theme more fitted for the disputations of theologians.My position, he
seems to keep saying, is that if the Pope is spiritually supreme, then
he is virtually and practically _as if he were_ infallible, just in the
same sense in which the English Parliament and monarch, and the Russian
Czar, are as if they were infallible.But let us not argue so much about
this, which is only secondary.The main question is whether without the
Pope there can be a true Christianity, 'that is to say, a Christianity,
active, powerful, converting, regenerating, conquering, perfecting.'De Maistre was probably conducted to his theory by an analogy, which he
tacitly leaned upon more strongly than it could well bear, between
temporal organisation and spiritual organisation.In inchoate
communities, the momentary self-interest and the promptly stirred
passions of men would rend the growing society in pieces, unless they
were restrained by the strong hand of law in some shape or other,
written or unwritten, and administered by an authority, either
physically too strong to be resisted, or else set up by the common
consent seeking to further the general convenience.To divide this
authority, so that none should know where to look for a sovereign
decree, nor be able to ascertain the commands of sovereign law; to
embody it in the persons of many discordant expounders, each assuming
oracular weight and equal sanction; to leave individuals to administer
and interpret it for themselves, and to decide among themselves its
application to their own cases; what would this be but a deliberate
preparation for anarchy and dissolution?For it is one of the clear
conditions of the efficacy of the social union, that every member of it
should be able to know for certain the terms on which he belongs to it,
the compliances which it will insist upon in him, and the compliances
which it will in turn permit him to insist upon in others, and therefore
it is indispensable that there should be some definite and admitted
centre where this very essential knowledge should be accessible.Some such reflections as these must have been at the bottom of De
Maistre's great apology for the Papal supremacy, or at any rate they may
serve to bring before our minds with greater clearness the kind of
foundations on which his scheme rested.For law substitute Christianity,
for social union spiritual union, for legal obligations the obligations
of the faith.Instead of individuals bound together by allegiance to
common political institutions, conceive communities united in the bonds
of religious brotherhood into a sort of universal republic, under the
moderate supremacy of a supreme spiritual power.As a matter of fact, it
was the intervention of this spiritual power which restrained the
anarchy, internal and external, of the ferocious and imperfectly
organised sovereignties that figure in the early history of modern
Europe.And as a matter of theory, what could be more rational and
defensible than such an intervention made systematic, with its
rightfulness and disinterestedness universally recognised?Grant
Christianity as the spiritual basis of the life and action of modern
communities; supporting both the organised structure of each of them,
and the interdependent system composed of them all; accepted by the
individual members of each, and by the integral bodies forming the
whole.But who shall declare what the Christian doctrine is, and how its
maxims bear upon special cases, and what oracles they announce in
particular sets of circumstances?Amid the turbulence of popular
passion, in face of the crushing despotism of an insensate tyrant,
between the furious hatred of jealous nations or the violent ambition of
rival sovereigns, what likelihood would there be of either party to the
contention yielding tranquilly and promptly to any presentation of
Christian teaching made by the other, or by some suspected neutral as a
decisive authority between them?Obviously there must be some supreme
and indisputable interpreter, before whose final decree the tyrant
should quail, the flood of popular lawlessness flow back within its
accustomed banks, and contending sovereigns or jealous nations
fraternally embrace.Again, in those questions of faith and discipline,
which the ill-exercised ingenuity of men is for ever raising and
pressing upon the attention of Christendom, it is just as obvious that
there must be some tribunal to pronounce an authoritative judgment.Otherwise, each nation is torn into sects; and amid the throng of sects
where is unity?'To maintain that a crowd of independent churches form a
church, one and universal, is to maintain in other terms that all the
political governments of Europe only form a single government, one and
universal.'There could no more be a kingdom of France without a king,
nor an empire of Russia without an emperor, than there could be one
universal church without an acknowledged head.That this head must be
the successor of St.Peter, is declared alike by the voice of tradition,
the explicit testimony of the early writers, the repeated utterances of
later theologians of all schools, and that general sentiment which
presses itself upon every conscientious reader of religious history.The argument that the voice of the Church is to be sought in general
councils is absurd.To maintain that a council has any other function
than to assure and certify the Pope, when he chooses to strengthen his
judgment or to satisfy his doubts, is to destroy visible unity.Suppose
there to be an equal division of votes, as happened in the famous case
of Fenelon, and might as well happen in a general council, the doubt
would after all be solved by the final vote of the Pope.And 'what is
doubtful for twenty selected men is doubtful for the whole human race.Those who suppose that by multiplying the deliberating voices doubt is
lessened, must have very little knowledge of men, and can never have sat
in a deliberative body.'Again, supposing there to present itself one of
those questions of divine metaphysics that it is absolutely necessary to
refer to the decision of the supreme tribunal.Then our interest is not
that it should be decided in such or such a manner, but that it should
be decided without delay and without appeal.Besides, the world is now
grown too vast for general councils, which seem to be made only for the
youth of Christianity.In fine, why pursue futile or mischievous
discussions as to whether the Pope is above the Council or the Council
above the Pope?In ordinary questions in which a king is conscious of
sufficient light, he decides them himself, while the others in which he
is not conscious of this light, he transfers to the States-General
presided over by himself, but he is equally sovereign in either case.Let us be content to know, in the words
of Thomassin,[19] that 'the Pope in the midst of his Council is above
himself, and that the Council decapitated of its chief is below him.'The point so constantly dwelt upon by Bossuet, the obligation of the
canons upon the Pope, was of very little worth in De Maistre's judgment,
and he almost speaks with disrespect of the great Catholic defender for
being so prolix and pertinacious in elaborating it.Here again he finds
in Thomassin the most concise statement of what he held to be the true
view, just as he does in the controversy as to the relative superiority
of the Pope or the Council.'There is only an apparent contradiction,'
says Thomassin, 'between saying that the Pope is above the canons, and
that he is bound by them; that he is master of the canons, or that he is
not.Those who place him above the canons or make him their master, only
pretend that he _has a dispensing power over them_; while those who deny
that he is above the canons or is their master, mean no more than that
_he can only exercise a dispensing power for the convenience and in the
necessities of the Church_.'This is an excellent illustration of the
thoroughly political temper in which De Maistre treats the whole
subject.He looks at the power of the Pope over the canons much as a
modern English statesman looks at the question of the coronation oath,
and the extent to which it binds the monarch to the maintenance of the
laws existing at the time of its imposition.In the same spirit he
banishes from all account the crowd of nonsensical objections to Papal
supremacy, drawn from imaginary possibilities.Suppose a Pope, for
example, were to abolish all the canons at a single stroke; suppose him
to become an unbeliever; suppose him to go mad; and so forth.'Why,' De
Maistre says, 'there is not in the whole world a single power in a
condition to bear all possible and arbitrary hypotheses of this sort;
and if you judge them by what they can do, without speaking of what they
have done, they will have to be abolished every one.'[20] This, it may
be worth noticing, is one of the many passages in De Maistre's writings
which, both in the solidity of their argument and the direct force of
their expression, recall his great predecessor in the anti-revolutionary
cause, the ever-illustrious Burke.The vigour with which De Maistre sums up all these pleas for supremacy
is very remarkable; and to the crowd of enemies and indifferents, and
especially to the statesmen who are among them, he appeals with
admirable energy.Do you mean that the nations
should live without any religion, and do you not begin to perceive that
a religion there must be?And does not Christianity, not only by its
intrinsic worth but because it is in possession, strike you as
preferable to every other?Have you been better contented with other
attempts in this way?Peradventure the twelve apostles might please you
better than the Theophilanthropists and Martinists?Does the Sermon on
the Mount seem to you a passable code of morals?And if the entire
people were to regulate their conduct on this model, should you be
content?I fancy that I hear you reply affirmatively.Well, since the
only object now is to maintain this religion for which you thus declare
your preference, how could you have, I do not say the stupidity, but the
cruelty, to turn it into a democracy, and to place this precious deposit
in the hands of the rabble?'You attach too much importance to the dogmatic part of this religion.By what strange contradiction would you desire to agitate the universe
for some academic quibble, for miserable wranglings about mere words
(these are your own terms)?Will you
call the Bishop of Quebec and the Bishop of Lucon to interpret a line of
the Catechism?That believers should quarrel about infallibility is what
I know, for I see it; but that statesmen should quarrel in the same way
about this great privilege, is what I shall never be able to
conceive.... That all the bishops in the world should be convoked to
determine a divine truth necessary to salvation--nothing more natural,
if such a method is indispensable; for no effort, no trouble, ought to
be spared for so exalted an aim.But if the only point is the
establishment of one opinion in the place of another, then the
travelling expenses of even one single Infallible are sheer waste.If
you want to spare the two most valuable things on earth, time and money,
make all haste to write to Rome, in order to procure thence a lawful
decision which shall declare the unlawful doubt.Nothing more is needed;
policy asks no more.'[21]

Definitely, then, the influence of the Popes restored to their ancient
supremacy would be exercised in the renewal and consolidation of social
order resting on the Christian faith, somewhat after this manner.The
anarchic dogma of the sovereignty of peoples, having failed to do
anything beyond showing that the greatest evils resulting from obedience
do not equal the thousandth part of those which result from rebellion,
would be superseded by the practice of appeals to the authority of the
Holy See.Do not suppose that the Revolution is at an end, or that the
column is replaced because it is raised up from the ground.A man must
be blind not to see that all the sovereignties in Europe are growing
weak; on all sides confidence and affection are deserting them; sects
and the spirit of individualism are multiplying themselves in an
appalling manner.There are only two alternatives: you must either
purify the will of men, or else you must enchain it; the monarch who
will not do the first, must enslave his subjects or perish; servitude or
spiritual unity is the only choice open to nations.On the one hand is
the gross and unrestrained tyranny of what in modern phrase is styled
Imperialism, and on the other a wise and benevolent modification of
temporal sovereignty in the interests of all by an established and
accepted spiritual power.No middle path lies before the people of
Europe.Temporal absolutism we must have.The only question is whether
or no it shall be modified by the wise, disinterested, and moderating
counsels of the Church, as given by her consecrated chief.*       *       *       *       *

There can be very little doubt that the effective way in which De
Maistre propounded and vindicated this theory made a deep impression on
the mind of Comte.Very early in his career this eminent man had
declared: 'De Maistre has for me the peculiar property of helping me to
estimate the philosophic capacity of people, by the repute in which they
hold him.'Among his other reasons at that time for thinking well of M.
Guizot was that, notwithstanding his transcendent Protestantism, he
complied with the test of appreciating De Maistre.[22] Comte's rapidly
assimilative intelligence perceived that here at last there was a
definite, consistent, and intelligible scheme for the reorganisation of
European society, with him the great end of philosophic endeavour.Its
principle of the division of the spiritual and temporal powers, and of
the relation that ought to subsist between the two, was the base of
Comte's own scheme.In general form the plans of social reconstruction are identical; in
substance, it need scarcely be said, the differences are fundamental.The temporal power, according to Comte's design, is to reside with
industrial chiefs, and the spiritual power to rest upon a doctrine
scientifically established.De Maistre, on the other hand, believed that
the old authority of kings and Christian pontiffs was divine, and any
attempt to supersede it in either case would have seemed to him as
desperate as it seemed impious.In his strange speculation on _Le
Principe Generateur des Constitutions Politiques_, he contends that all
laws in the true sense of the word (which by the way happens to be
decidedly an arbitrary and exclusive sense) are of supernatural origin,
and that the only persons whom we have any right to call legislators,
are those half-divine men who appear mysteriously in the early history
of nations, and counterparts to whom we never meet in later days.Elsewhere he maintains to the same effect, that royal families in the
true sense of the word 'are growths of nature, and differ from others,
as a tree differs from a shrub.'People suppose a family to be royal because it reigns; on the contrary,
it reigns because it is royal, because it has more life, _plus d'esprit
royal_--surely as mysterious and occult a force as the _virtus
dormitiva_ of opium.The common life of man is about thirty years; the
average duration of the reigns of European sovereigns, being Christian,
is at the very lowest calculation twenty.How is it possible that 'lives
should be only thirty years, and reigns from twenty-two to twenty-five,
if princes had not more common life than other men?'Mark again, the
influence of religion in the duration of sovereignties.All the
Christian reigns are longer than all the non-Christian reigns, ancient
and modern, and Catholic reigns have been longer than Protestant reigns.The reigns in England, which averaged more than twenty-three years
before the Reformation, have only been seventeen years since that, and
those of Sweden, which were twenty-two, have fallen to the same figure
of seventeen.Denmark, however, for some unknown cause does not appear
to have undergone this law of abbreviation; so, says De Maistre with
rather unwonted restraint, let us abstain from generalising.As a matter
of fact, however, the generalisation was complete in his own mind, and
there was nothing inconsistent with his view of the government of the
universe in the fact that a Catholic prince should live longer than a
Protestant; indeed such a fact was the natural condition of his view
being true.Many differences among the people who hold to the
theological interpretation of the circumstances of life arise from the
different degrees of activity which they variously attribute to the
intervention of God, from those who explain the fall of a sparrow to the
ground by a special and direct energy of the divine will, up to those
at the opposite end of the scale, who think that direct participation
ended when the universe was once fairly launched.De Maistre was of
those who see the divine hand on every side and at all times.If, then,
Protestantism was a pernicious rebellion against the faith which God had
provided for the comfort and salvation of men, why should not God be
likely to visit princes, as offenders with the least excuse for their
backslidings, with the curse of shortness of days?In a trenchant passage De Maistre has expounded the Protestant
confession of faith, and shown what astounding gaps it leaves as an
interpretation of the dealings of God with man.'By virtue of a terrible
anathema,' he supposes the Protestant to say, 'inexplicable no doubt,
but much less inexplicable than incontestable, the human race lost all
its rights.Plunged in mortal darkness, it was ignorant of all, since it
was ignorant of God; and, being ignorant of him, it could not pray to
him, so that it was spiritually dead without being able to ask for life.Arrived by rapid degradation at the last stage of debasement, it
outraged nature by its manners, its laws, even by its religions.It
consecrated all vices, it wallowed in filth, and its depravation was
such that the history of those times forms a dangerous picture, which it
is not good for all men so much as to look upon.God, however, _having
dissembled for forty centuries_, bethought him of his creation.At the
appointed moment announced from all time, he did not despise a virgin's
womb; he clothed himself in our unhappy nature, and appeared on the
earth; we saw him, we touched him, he spoke to us; he lived, he taught,
he suffered, he died for us.He arose from his tomb according to his
promise; he appeared again among us, solemnly to assure to his Church a
succour that would last as long as the world.'But, alas, this effort of almighty benevolence was a long way from
securing all the success that had been foretold.For lack of knowledge,
or of strength, or by distraction maybe, God missed his aim, and could
not keep his word.Less sage than a chemist who should undertake to shut
up ether in canvas or paper, he only confided to men the truth that he
had brought upon the earth; it escaped, then, as one might have
foreseen, by all human pores; soon, this holy religion revealed to man
by the Man-God, became no more than an infamous idolatry, which would
remain to this very moment if Christianity after sixteen centuries had
not been suddenly brought back to its original purity by a couple of
sorry creatures.'[23]

Perhaps it would be easier than he supposed to present his own system in
an equally irrational aspect.If you measure the proceedings of
omnipotence by the uses to which a wise and benevolent man would put
such superhuman power, if we can imagine a man of this kind endowed with
it, De Maistre's theory of the extent to which a supreme being
interferes in human things, is after all only a degree less ridiculous
and illogical, less inadequate and abundantly assailable, than that
Protestantism which he so heartily despised.Would it be difficult,
after borrowing the account, which we have just read, of the tremendous
efforts made by a benign creator to shed moral and spiritual light upon
the world, to perplex the Catholic as bitterly as the Protestant, by
confronting him both with the comparatively scanty results of those
efforts, and with the too visible tendencies of all the foremost
agencies in modern civilisation to leave them out of account as forces
practically spent?*       *       *       *       *

De Maistre has been surpassed by no thinker that we know of as a
defender of the old order.If anybody could rationalise the idea of
supernatural intervention in human affairs, the idea of a Papal
supremacy, the idea of a spiritual unity, De Maistre's acuteness and
intellectual vigour, and, above all, his keen sense of the urgent social
need of such a thing being done, would assuredly have enabled him to do
it.In 1817, when he wrote the work in which this task is attempted, the
hopelessness of such an achievement was less obvious than it is now.The Revolution lay in a deep slumber that
many persons excusably took for the quiescence of extinction.Legitimacy
and the spiritual system that was its ally in the face of the
Revolution, though mostly its rival or foe when they were left alone
together, seemed to be restored to the fulness of their power.Fifty
years have elapsed since then, and each year has seen a progressive
decay in the principles which then were triumphant.It was not,
therefore, without reason that De Maistre warned people against
believing '_que la colonne est replacee, parcequ'elle est relevee_.'The
solution which he so elaborately recommended to Europe has shown itself
desperate and impossible.Catholicism may long remain a vital creed to
millions of men, a deep source of spiritual consolation and refreshment,
and a bright lamp in perplexities of conduct and morals; but resting on
dogmas which cannot by any amount of compromise be incorporated with the
daily increasing mass of knowledge, assuming as the condition of its
existence forms of the theological hypothesis which all the
preponderating influences of contemporary thought concur directly or
indirectly in discrediting, upheld by an organisation which its history
for the last five centuries has exposed to the distrust and hatred of
men as the sworn enemy of mental freedom and growth, the pretensions of
Catholicism to renovate society are among the most pitiable and impotent
that ever devout, high-minded, and benevolent persons deluded themselves
into maintaining or accepting.Over the modern invader it is as
powerless as paganism was over the invaders of old.The barbarians of
industrialism, grasping chiefs and mutinous men, give no ear to priest
or pontiff, who speak only dead words, who confront modern issues with
blind eyes, and who stretch out a palsied hand to help.Christianity,
according to a well-known saying, has been tried and failed; the
religion of Christ remains to be tried.One would prefer to qualify the
first clause, by admitting how much Christianity has done for Europe
even with its old organisation, and to restrict the charge of failure
within the limits of the modern time.Whether in changed forms and with new supplements the teaching of its
founder is destined to be the chief inspirer of that social and human
sentiment which seems to be the only spiritual bond capable of uniting
men together again in a common and effective faith, is a question which
it is unnecessary to discuss here.'_They talk about the first centuries
of Christianity_,' said De Maistre, '_I would not be sure that they are
over yet_.'Perhaps not; only if the first centuries are not yet over,
it is certain that the Christianity of the future will have to be so
different from the Christianity of the past, as to demand or deserve
another name.Even if Christianity, itself renewed, could successfully encounter the
achievement of renewing society, De Maistre's ideal of a spiritual power
controlling the temporal power, and conciliating peoples with their
rulers by persuasion and a coercion only moral, appears to have little
chance of being realised.The separation of the two powers is sealed,
with a completeness that is increasingly visible.The principles on
which the process of the emancipation of politics is being so rapidly
carried on, demonstrate that the most marked tendencies of modern
civilisation are strongly hostile to a renewal in any imaginable shape,
or at any future time, of a connection whether of virtual subordination
or nominal equality, which has laid such enormous burdens on the
consciences and understandings of men.If the Church has the uppermost
hand, except in primitive times, it destroys freedom; if the State is
supreme, it destroys spirituality.The free Church in the free State is
an idea that every day more fully recommends itself to the public
opinion of Europe, and the sovereignty of the Pope, like that of all
other spiritual potentates, can only be exercised over those who choose
of their own accord to submit to it; a sovereignty of a kind which De
Maistre thought not much above anarchy.To conclude, De Maistre's mind was of the highest type of those who fill
the air with the arbitrary assumptions of theology, and the abstractions
of the metaphysical stage of thought.At every point you meet the
peremptorily declared volition of a divine being, or the ontological
property of a natural object.The French Revolution is explained by the
will of God; and the kings reign because they have the _esprit royal_.Every truth is absolute, not relative; every explanation is universal,
not historic.These differences in method and point of view amply
explain his arrival at conclusions that seem so monstrous to men who
look upon all knowledge as relative, and insist that the only possible
road to true opinion lies away from volitions and abstractions in the
positive generalisations of experience.There can be no more
satisfactory proof of the rapidity with which we are leaving these
ancient methods, and the social results which they produced, than the
willingness with which every rightly instructed mind now admits how
indispensable were the first, and how beneficial the second.Those can
best appreciate De Maistre and his school, what excellence lay in their
aspirations, what wisdom in their system, who know most clearly why
their aspirations were hopeless, and what makes their system an
anachronism.FOOTNOTES:

[10] De Maistre forgot or underestimated the services of Leo the
Isaurian whose repulse of the Caliph's forces at Constantinople (A.D.717) was perhaps as important for Europe as the more renowned victory of
Charles Martel.But then Leo was an Iconoclast and heretic.Finlay's
_Byzantine Empire_, pp.[11] _Du Pape_, bk.[12] _Du Pape_, bk.'The Greeks,' he
says, 'had at times only a secondary share in the ecclesiastical
controversies in the Eastern Church, though the circumstance of these
controversies having been carried on in the Greek language has made the
natives of Western Europe attribute them to a philosophic, speculative,
and polemic spirit, inherent in the Hellenic mind.A very slight
examination of history is sufficient to prove that several of the
heresies which disturbed the Eastern Church had their origin in the more
profound religious ideas of the oriental nations, and that many of the
opinions called heretical were in a great measure expressions of the
mental nationality of the Syrians, Armenians, Egyptians, and Persians,
and had no conception whatever with the Greek mind.'--_Byzantine Empire,
from 716 to 1057_, p.263) remarks very truly, that 'the religious or
theological portion of Popery, as a section of the Christian Church, is
really Greek; and it is only the ecclesiastical, political, and
theoretic peculiarities of the fabric which can be considered as the
work of the Latin Church.'[14] Sir J. Fitzjames Stephen in the _Saturday Review_, Sept.[15] _Du Pape_, bk.[16] _Ib._ bk.[17] _Ib._ bk.[18] '_Il n'y a point de souverainete qui pour le bonheur des hommes, et
pour le sien surtout, ne soit bornee de quelque maniere, mais dans
l'interieur de ces bornes, placees comme il plait a Dieu, elle est
toujours et partout absolue et tenue pour infaillible.Et quand je parle
de l'exercice legitime de la souverainete, je n'entends point ou je ne
dis point l'exercice_ juste, _ce qui produirait une amphibologie
dangereuse, a moins que par ce dernier mot on ne veuille dire que tout
ce qu'elle opine dans son cercle est_ juste ou tenu pour tel, _ce qui
est la verite.C'est ainsi qu'un tribunal supreme, tant qu'il ne sort
pas de ses attributions, est toujours juste_; car c'est la meme chose
DANS LA PRATIQUE, d'etre infaillible, ou de se tromper sans appel.'--Bk.[19] Thomassin, the eminent French theologian, flourished from the
middle to the end of the seventeenth century.The aim of his writings
generally was to reconcile conflicting opinions on discipline or
doctrine by exhibiting a true sense in all.In this spirit he wrote on
the Pope and the Councils, and on the never-ending question of Grace.Among other things, he insisted that all languages could be traced to
the Hebrew.He wrote a defence of the edict in which Lewis XIV.revoked
the Edict of Nantes, contending that it was less harsh than some of the
decrees of Theodosius and Justinian, which the holiest fathers of the
Church had not scrupled to approve--an argument which would now be
thought somewhat too dangerous for common use, as cutting both ways.Gibbon made use of his _Discipline de l'Eglise_ in the twentieth
chapter, and elsewhere.[20] _Du Pape_, bk.[22] Littre, _Auguste Comte et la Phil.[23] _Du Pape_, Conclusion, p.*       *       *       *       *

END OF VOL.*       *       *       *       *

_Printed by_ R.& R. Clark, Limited, _Edinburgh_.Transcribers' Notes:

Minor printer errors (omitted quotation marks) have been amended without
note.Other errors have been amended and are listed below.OE/oe ligatures have not been retained in this version.List of Amendments:

Page 305: lights amended to rights; "... freedom, of equal rights, and
by..."

Page 329: impressisn amended to impression; "... theory made a deep
impression on the mind..."





End of Project Gutenberg's Critical Miscellanies (Vol.came the unexpected cry from
some outsiders."Yes, give it up, Tom," whispered Sam."We're in hot water enough, on account of that feast.""I'll give it up if Caven is willing," muttered

"I'll meet you another time," answered Caven, and walked rapidly
away.demanded George Strong, as he strode up."Nothing, sir," said one of the boy."Some of the fellows were
wrestling for possession of that spade.""Oh, I was afraid there was a fight," and Mr.He was on his way to the barn, and presently the cadets saw him
come forth with the man-of-fall-work and the light spring wagon."They are going to take poor Aleck to the Cedarville lock-up,"
announced Fred."Poor chap, I never thought this of him!""To me this affair isn't very clear.""I don't believe they will be able to convict him of the crime,"
put in Sam.An hour later Peleg Snuggers started away from Putnam Hall with
his prisoner.Aleck looked the picture of misery as he sat on a
rear seat, his wrists bound together and one leg tied to the wagon
seat with a rope."Dis am a mistake," he groaned.Some of the boys wished to speak to him, but this was not
permitted."You may think I am hard with him," said Captain Putnam, later on,
"but to tell the truth he does not come from a very good family
and he has a step-brother already in prison.""Aleck can't be held responsible for his stepbrother's doings,"
murmured Tom, but not loud enough for the master to hear him.A diligent search had been made for the other stolen articles, but
nothing more was brought to light.If Pop had taken the things he
had either hidden them well or else disposed of them.It was nearly nightfall when Peleg Snuggers drove back to the
Hall.Dick and Tom met him just outside the gates and saw that
the man-of-all-work looked much dejected."Well, Peleg, is he safe in jail?""No, he ain't," was the snappy reply."Why, what did you do with him?"I didn't do nuthin--not me.It was him as did it all--cut
that blessed rope and shoved me over the dashboard on to the
hosses!""Do you mean to say he got away from you?""Yes, he did--got away like a streak o' fightnin', thet's wot he
did, consarn him!"And without another word Peleg drove to the
rear of the Hall, put his team in the barn, and went in to report
to Captain Putnam.Another row resulted, and this nearly cost the utility Man his
position.But it appeared that he was not so much to blame that
Alexander Pop had taken him unawares and finally he was sent away
to his work with the caution to be more careful in the future.Before night and during the next day a hunt was made for the
<DW52> man, but he had left the vicinity entirely, gone to New
York, and shipped on one of the outward-bound ocean vessels.The
Rover boys fancied that they would never see him again, but in
this they were mistaken.CHAPTER IX

THE ROVER BOYS ON WHEELS


"Say, fellows, but this is the greatest sport yet!""I feel like flying, Tom," said Dick Rover."I never thought
wheeling was so grand."It was several weeks later, and the scholars were having a
half-holiday.Just six days before, Randolph Rover had surprised
his three nephews by sending each a handsome bicycle, and it had
taken them hardly any time to learn how to handle the machines."Let us take a ride over to Chardale," said Dick."I understand
that the roads are very good in that direction.""All right, I'm willing," answered Sam, and Tom said the same.Soon the three brothers were on the way, Dick leading and Tom and
Sam coming behind, side by side.It was an ideal day for cycling, cool and clear, and the road they
had elected to take was inviting to the last degree, with its
broad curves, its beautiful trees, and the mountainous views far
to the north and west."It's a wonder we didn't get wheels before," observed Dick."This
beats skating or riding a to bits.""Just you look out that you don't take a header!""This road is all right, but a loose stone might do a pile of
damage.""I've got my eye on the road," answered his big brother."For the
matter of that, we'll all have to keep our eyes open."To reach Chardale they had to cross several bridges and then
descend a long hill, at the foot of which ran the railroad to
several towns north and south.With a laugh, Sam tried
to catch up to him, but could not.went on the
fun-loving Rover, as the hill was gained, and on he started, his
wheel flying faster and faster as yard after yard was covered."I took it off entirely this
morning."This reply had scarcely reached Dick's ears when another sound
came to him which disturbed him greatly.Far away he heard the whistle of a locomotive as it came around
the bottom of the hill.Looking in the direction, he saw the puff
of smoke over the treetops.He tried to cry out, but now the road was rather rough, and he had
to pay strict attention 'to where he was riding."Tom's going to get into trouble," gasped Sam, as he ranged up
alongside of his elder brother."The road crosses the railroad
tracks just below here."As Dick finished he saw a chance to stop and at once dismounted.Then he yelled at the top of his lungs:

"Tom, stop!Stop, or you'll run into the railroad train!"Sam also came to a halt and set up a shout.But Tom was now
speeding along like the wind and did not hear them.Nearer and nearer he shot to the railroad tracks.Then the
whistle of the locomotive broke upon his ears and he turned pale."I don't want to run into that train," he muttered, and tried to
bring his bicycle to a halt.But the movement did not avail without a brake, and so he was
compelled to seek for some side path into which he might guide his
machine.the road was hemmed in with a heavy woods on one side
and a field of rocks on the other.A sudden stop, therefore,
would mean a bad spill, and Tom had no desire to break his bones
by any such proceeding.Nearer and nearer he drew to the railroad crossing.He could now
hear the puffing of the engine quite plainly and caught a glimpse
of the long train over the rocks to his left.On he bounded until
the crossing itself came into view.He was less than a hundred
yards from it--and the oncoming engine was about the same
distance away!There are some moments in one's life that seem hours, and the
present fraction of time was of that sort to poor Tom.He had a
vision of a terrific smash-up, and of Dick and Sam picking up his
lifeless remains from the railroad tracks.he
muttered, and then, just before the tracks were reached, he made
one wild, desperate leap in the direction of a number of bushes
skirting the woods.He turned over and over, hit hard--and for
several seconds knew no more.When Dick and Sam came up they found Tom sitting in the very midst
of the bushes.The bicycle lay among the rocks with the handle-bars
and the spokes of the front wheel badly twisted.asked his big brother sympathetically,
yet glad to learn that Tom had not been ground to death under the
train, which had now passed the crossing."I don't know if I'm hurt or not," was the'slow answer, as Tom
held his handkerchief to his nose, which was bleeding."I tried to plow up these bushes with my head, that's all.I guess
my ankle is sprained, too.""You can't ride that wheel any further," announced Sam.I've had enough, for a few days at least."It was a good quarter of an hour before Tom felt like standing up.Then he found his ankle pained him so much that walking was out of
the question."I'm sure I don't know what I am going to do," he said ruefully."I can't walk and I can't ride, and I don't know as I can stay
here.""Perhaps Dick and I can carry you to Hopeton," said Sam,
mentioning a small town just beyond the railroad tracks.Perhaps the
driver of that will give me a lift."As Tom finished a large farm wagon rattled into sight, drawn by a
pair of bony horses and driven by a tall, lank farmer."Hullo, wot's the matter?"asked the farmer, as he drew rein."No, I've had a smash-up," answered Tom."My brother's ankle is sprained, and we would like to know if you
can give him a lift to the next town," put in Dick."We'll pay you
for your trouble.""That's all right--Seth Dickerson is allers ready to aid a
fellow-bein' in distress," answered the farmer."Can ye git in
the wagon alone?"Tom could not, and the farmer and Dick carried him forward and
placed him on the seat.Then the damaged bicycle was placed in
the rear of the turnout, and Seth Dickerson drove off, while Sam
and Dick followed on their steeds of steel."I see you air dressed in cadet uniforms," remarked the farmer, as
the party proceeded on its way."Be you fellers from Pornell
school?""No; we come from Putnam Hall," answered Tom."Oh, yes--'bout the same thing, I take it.How is matters up to
the school--larnin' a heap?""We are trying to learn all we have to.""Had some trouble up thar, didn't ye?My wife's brother was
a-tellin' me about it.A darkey stole some money an' watches, an'
that like.""They think he stole them," said Tom."Why don't Captain Putnam hunt around them air pawnshops fer the
watches?"went on Seth Dickerson, after a pause."The thief would most likely pawn 'em, to my way of thinkin'.""He hasn't much of a chance to do that.But I presume the police
will keep their eyes open.""I was over to Auburn yesterday--had to go to see about a
mortgage on our farm--and I stopped into one of them pawnbrokin'
shops to buy a shot-gun, if I could git one cheap.While I was in
there a big boy came in and pawned a gold watch an' two shirt
studs.""Is that so," returned Tom, with much interest."What kind of a
looking boy was it?""A tall, slim feller, with reddish hair.He had sech shifty eyes
I couldn't help but think that maybe he had stolen them things
jest to raise some spending money.""He said Jack Smith, but I don't think thet vas correct, for he
hesitated afore he gave it.""A tall, slim fellow, with reddish hair and shifty eyes," mused
Tom."He had on a rough suit of brownish-green and a derby hat with a
hole knocked in one side.""That description fits one of our students exactly.""What's up, Tom; do you feel worse?"asked Dick, as he wheeled as
closely to the seat of the wagon as possible.But I've made a big discovery--at least, I
feel pretty certain that I have?""I've discovered who stole that money and other stuff."CHAPTER X

A STRANGE MESSAGE FROM THE SEA


"Jim Caven!"repeated Dick slowly, "What makes you believe that he
is guilty?"Dickerson here says," answered Tom, and repeated
what the farmer had told him."Gracious, that does look black for Caven!""Would you recognize that boy
again if you saw him?"His eyes was wot got me--never saw
sech unsteady ones afore in my life.""Yes, those eyes put me down on Caven the minute I saw him,"
answered Tom."More than half of the boys at the Hall have put
him down as a first-class sneak, although we can't exactly tell
why.""I think it would be best if Mr.Dickerson
would drive back to the Hall with us and tell Captain Putnam of
what he knows.""And see if he can identify Caven," finished Sam."Are you
willing to do that, Mr."Well, to tell the truth, I've got some business to attend to
now," was the slow reply."I am sure Captain Putnam will pay you for your trouble," went on
Sam."You seem mighty anxious to bring this Caven to justice,"  smiled
the farmer."We are, for two reasons," said Tom."The first is, because he
isn't the nice sort to have around, and the second is, because one
of the men working at the school, a  waiter, whom we all
liked, has been suspected of this crime and had to run away to
avoid arrest."Well--"  The farmer mused for a moment."All right, I'll
go back with ye--and at once."The team was turned around as well as the narrow confines of the
hilly road permitted, and soon the Rover boys were on their way
back to Putnam Hall, a proceeding which pleased Tom in more ways
than one, since he would not have now to put up at a strange
resort to have his ankle and his wheel cared for.They bowled
along at a rapid gait, the horses having more speed in them than
their appearance indicated.They were just turning into the road
leading to Putnam Hall grounds when Dick espied several cadets
approaching, bound for the lake shore."Here come Caven, Willets, and several others!"Dickerson, do you recognize any of those boys?"The farmer gave a searching glance, which lasted until the
approaching cadets were beside the wagon.Then he pointed his
hand at Jim Caven."Thet's the boy I seed over to Auburn, a-pawning thet watch an'
them studs," he announced."He's got his sodger uniform on, but I
know him jest the same."Jim Caven looked at the farmer in astonishment.Then when he
heard Seth Dickerson's words he fell back and his face grew
deathly white."I--I don't know you," he stammered."I seed you over to Auburn, in a pawnshop," repeated Dickerson."I was never over to Auburn
in my life.Why should I go there to a pawnshop?""I guess you know well enough, Caven," said Tom."You bad better
come back to the Hall with us and have a talk with Captain
Putnam."This is--is a--a plot against me,"
stammered the slim youth.cried Dick, and caught Caven by the arm.But
with a jerk the seared boy freed himself and ran down the road at
the top of his speed.Sam and Dick pursued him on their bicycles, while some of the
others came after on foot.Seeing this, Jim Caven took to the
woods just as Dan Baxter had done, and the boys found it
impossible to track him any further."I wonder if he'll come back tonight?"said Dick, as the party
returned to where they had left Seth Dickerson and Tom."I don't think he will," answered Sam."I declare, he must be
almost as bad as the Baxters!"The farm wagon soon reached the Hall, and Dick ushered Seth
Dickerson into Captain Putnam's office.The captain looked
surprised at the unexpected visitor, but listened with deep
concern to all the farmer and the Rover boys had to say."This certainly looks black for Caven," he said at last."I did
not think I had such a bad boy here.And you say he got away from
you?""It is a question if he will come back--providing he is really
guilty.I will have his trunk and bag searched without delay.But if he is guilty how did that ruby stud and the watch come into
Alexander Pop's possession?""He was down on Aleck," replied Tom, who had hobbled in after the
others."And, besides, he thought if Aleck was arrested the
search for the criminal would go no further."It is a sad state of affairs at
the best."The party ascended to the dormitory which Jim Caven occupied with
several smaller boy.His trunk was found locked, but Captain Putnam
took upon himself the responsibility of hunting up a key to fit the
box.Once open the trunk was found to contain, among other things,
a bit of heavy cloth tied with a piece of strong cord.cried the captain, as he undid the
package and brought to light several of the missing watches and
also some of the jewelry."I guess it is a clear case against
Caven, and Pop is innocent.""I wish we could tell Pop of it," put in Dick."I will do what I can for the <DW64>, Rover.I am very sorry
indeed, now, that I suspected him," said Captain Putnam, with a
slow shake of his head.At the bottom of the trunk was a pocketbook containing nearly all
of the money which had been stolen.A footing-up revealed the
fact that two watches and three gold shirt studs were still
missing."And those were pawned in Auburn," said Sam."Just wait and see
if I am not right."A party was organized to hunt for Caven, and the captain himself
went to Auburn that very evening.The hunt for the missing boy
proved unsuccessful, and it may be added here that he never turned
up at Putnam Hall again nor at his home in Middletown, having run
away to the West.When Captain Putnam came back he announced that he had recovered
all but one watch.The various goods and the money were distributed
among their rightful owners, and it must be confessed that a big
sigh of relief went up from the cadets who had suffered.The
single missing timepiece was made good to the boy who had lost it,
by the captain buying a similar watch for the youth.After this several weeks passed without anything of special
interest occurring outside of a stirring baseball match with a
club from Ithaca, which Putnam Hall won by a score of six to
three.In this game Dick made a much-needed home run, thus
covering himself with glory."And they hang together like links of a chain," added Fred."The
friend of one is the friend of all, and the same can be said of an
enemy."One morning a telegraph messenger from Cedarville was seen
approaching the Hall, just as the boys were forming for the
roll-call."Here's a telegram for somebody," said Sam."A message for Richard Rover," announced George Strong, after
receiving it, and handed over the yellow envelope.Wondering what the message could contain and who had sent it, Dick
tore open the envelope and read the brief communication.As his
eyes met the words his head seemed to swim around, so bewildered
was he by what was written there.He
says--but read it for yourselves," and the elder Rover handed
over the message, which ran as follows:

"Have just received a strange message from the sea, supposed to be
written by your father."Oh, I pray Heaven the news
is true!""A strange message from the sea," repeated Dick."Perhaps it's a message that was picked up by some steamer,"
suggested Sam."Anyway, uncle wants us to come home at once.""But of course he wanted all of us to come," put in Tom."Anyway,
four horses couldn't hold me back!""If we hurry up
we can catch the noon boat at Cedarville for Ithaca.""Yes, and the evening train for Oak Run," finished Tom.To tell the truth, that message had fired him
as he had never been fired before.He burst into the captain's
office pell-mell, with Tom and Sam on his heels, to explain the
situation.Ten minutes later--and even this time seemed an age
to the brothers--they were hurrying into their ordinary clothing
and packing, their satchels, while Peleg Snuggers was hitching up
to take them to the landing at Cedarville."Good-by to you, and good luck!"shouted Frank, as they clambered
into the wagon, and many other cadets set up a shout.The Rover boys had turned their backs on dear
old Putnam Hall for a long while to come.CHAPTER XI

THE ROVERS REACH A CONCLUSION


For the three Rover boys the Golden Star could not make the trip
from Cedarville to Ithaca fast enough.They fretted over every
delay, and continually wondered if there was any likelihood of
their missing the train which was to take them to Oak Run, the
nearest railroad station to Valley Brook farm, their uncle's home.But the train was not missed; instead, they had to wait half an
hour for it.During this time they procured dinner, although Dick
felt so strange he could scarcely eat a mouthful."Uncle Randolph doesn't say much," he murmured to Tom."We'll know everything before we go to bed, Dick," answered his
brother."I don't believe Uncle Randolph would telegraph unless
the news was good."They indulged in all sorts of speculation, as the train sped on
its way to Oak Run.When the latter place was reached it was
dark, and they found Jack Ness, the hired man, waiting for them
with the carriage."There, I  knowed it," grinned Jack.Rover calculated that
only Dick would come, but I said we'd have 'em all.""And what is this news of my father?""It's a message as was picked up off the coast of Africky,"
replied Ness.Rover didn't explain very clearly to me.He's
a good deal excited, and so is the missus.""Can it be that father is on his
way home?"Leas'wise, your uncle didn't say
so," concluded the hired man.Never had the horses made better time than they did now, and yet
the boys urged Ness continually to drive faster.Swift River was
soon crossed--that stream where Sam had once had such a stirring
adventure--and they bowled along past the Fox and other farms."There is Uncle Randolph out on the porch to greet us!""I do believe they look
happy, don't you, Tom?""They certainly don't look sad," was the noncommittal answer; and
then the carriage swept up to the horse-block and the three boys
alighted."Well,
perhaps it is just as well so.""We simply couldn't stay behind, uncle,"  said Sam."And we are
dying to know what it all means.""But you must have supper first," put in Aunt Martha, as she gave
one and another a motherly kiss."I know riding on the cars
usually makes Tom tremendously hungry.""Well eat after we have had the news," said Tom."We're dying to
know all, as Sam says.""The news is rather perplexing, to tell the truth," said Randolph
Rover, as he led the way into the library of the spacious home."I hardly know what to make of it.""It came by mail--a bulky letter all the way from Cape Town,
Africa.""No, from a Captain Townsend, who, it seems, commands the clipper
ship Rosabel.came in a shout from all three of the Rover
boys."You had better read the captain's communication first," answered
Randolph Rover."Then you will be more apt to understand the
other.Or shall I read it for the benefit of all?""Yes, yes, you read it, Uncle Randolph," was the answer."The letter is dated at Cape Town, and was written a little over a
month ago.It is addressed to 'Randolph Rover, or to Richard,
Thomas, or Samuel Rover, New York City,' and is further marked
'Highly Important-Do Not Lose or Destroy.'""Do hurry and tell
us, Uncle Randolph."And then his uncle read as follows:

"TO THE ROVER FAMILY, New York:

"I am a stranger to you, but I deem it my duty to write to you on
account of something which occurred on the 12th day of April last,
while my clipper ship Rosabel, bound from Boston, U. S. A., to
Cape Town, Africa, was sailing along the coast of Congo but a few
miles due west from the mouth of the Congo River."Our ship had been sent in by a heavy gale but the wind had gone
down, and we were doing more drifting than sailing to the
southward when the lookout espied a man on a small raft which was
drifting toward us."On coming closer, we discovered that the man was white and that
he looked half starved.We put out a boat and rescued the poor
creature  but he had suffered so much from spear wounds and
starvation that, on being taken on board of our ship, he
immediately relapsed into insensibility, and out of this we failed
to arouse him.He died at sundown, and we failed, even to learn
him name or home address."On searching the dead man's pockets we came across the enclosed
letter, addressed to you, and much soiled from water.As you will
see, it is dated more than a year back and was evidently in the
possession of the man who died for some time.Probably he started
out to deliver it, or to reach some point from which it could be
mailed."I trust that the message becomes the means of rescuing the
Anderson Rover mentioned in the letter, and I will be pleased to
learn if this letter of mine is received.The Rosabel sails from
Cape Town to Brazil as soon as her cargo can be discharged and
another taken on."Very truly yours,

"JOHN V. TOWNSEND, Captain."As Randolph Rover ceased reading there was a brief silence, broken
by Tom."So the man who died held a letter.And what is in that, Uncle
Randolph?""I will read it to you, boys, although that is a difficult matter,
for the writing is uneven and much blurred.On one part of the
sheet there is a blot of blood--the blood, I presume--of the
poor fellow who was trying to deliver the communication."Unfolding the stained document, Randolph Rover bent closer to the
table lamp that he might read the more easily.As for the boys,
they fairly held their breaths, that no spoken word might escape
them."The letter is addressed to me," said the uncle."But the
envelope is, as you can see, very much torn.I will read," and he
did so."NIWILI CAMP, on the Congo,

"July the 18th, 189--."DEAR BROTHER RANDOLPH:

"If, by the goodness of God, this reaches you, I trust that you
will set out without delay to my assistance."I write under great difficulties, as a prisoner, of the Bumwo
tribe of natives, ruled by King Susko."I have discovered the secret of a gold mine here, and the king
will not let me go, fearing that I will tell the outside world of
my discovery and bring the English or French here to slay him and
his followers."I entrust this to the care of an English sailor who is going to
try to make his escape.I cannot go myself, having had my leg
broken by a blow from one of my jailers."I am sick and weak in body, and it may be that I will soon die.Yet I beg of you to do what you can for me.If I die, I trust you
to be a father to my dear boys, Dick, Tom, and Sam, and ask Martha
for me to be a mother to them."The king expects soon to remove to another camp at a place called
Rhunda Konoka (the Water Well).Perhaps he will take me along, or
else he may slay me."All those who were with me are dead excepting several natives who
have joined the Burnwo tribe."Good-by, and do what you can until you are certain that I am
dead."Your loving brother,

"ANDERSON ROVER"

When Randolph Rover ceased reading he saw that there were tears in
the eyes of all of the boys, and that his wife was also crying.His own voice had had to be cleared continually.To all the
letter was like a message from the grave."That is all, my boy--and the letter was written about a year
ago!""But we'll go in search of him!""I thought I would go," answered Randolph Rover, "and I thought,
possibly, that I might take Dick with me.""I could never bear to
be left behind.""And you must take me," interrupted Sam."We always go together,
you know."At this talk Randolph Rover was somewhat taken aback."Why, what would three boys do in the heart of Africa?""I shan't stay behind--you can't
make me!""We have been through lots of adventures, uncle, you know that,"
came from Sam."But the danger, boys--" began the uncle."What danger wouldn't we face for father's sake!""I'd
go through fire and water for him.""You had better let us all go," said Dick."If you don't let Tom and Sam go, why, the chances are they'll--"

"Run away and go anyway," finished Sam."Oh, Uncle Randolph, say we can go; please do!""All-right, boys; as you are bound to have it so, you shall all
go.But don't blame me if the perils are greater than you
anticipate, and if the undertaking costs one or more of you your
lives."OFF FOR AFRICA


It was long after midnight before the conversation in relation to
the proposed trip to Africa came to an end.Rover insisted
that the boys should eat something, and they sat around the table
discussing the viands and the two letters at the same time."Have you any idea where this Niwili Camp is?""It is on the Congo, but how far froth the mouth of that stream is
a question, lad.Probably we can learn all about it when we reach
Boma, the capital of the Congo Free State.""The Congo is a pretty big stream, isn't it?"At its mouth it is about ten miles wide, and
it is from twelve to fourteen hundred miles long.Stanley traced
its course after an expedition in which he fought over thirty
battles with the natives."The natives that live close to the
ocean are peaceable enough, so I have been told.""And how are we going to get there?""I don't suppose
there are any regular steamers running to the Congo."I have written to a shipping firm in New York
for information, and they will probably send word by morning," was
the answer.It can well be imagined that the boys slept but little that night.In the morning they telegraphed to Putnam Hall for their trunks,
and also let Captain Putnam and their chums know how matters
stood.Then began preparations for such a tour as none of them
had ever before anticipated.Word came from New York in the early afternoon mail, and the
information sent was highly satisfactory to Randolph Rover.The
French steamer Republique was in port, loading for Boma and other
African ports, and would set sail on the coming Saturday.The
firm had taken upon itself the responsibility to speak of passage
for Mr."Uncle Randolph, you had better telegraph to
them at once for passage for the four of us."Rover, and the telegram was sent within
the hour.As but little in the way of outfits
could be procured in Oak Run or the adjoining villages, it was
decided that they should go down to New York on Thursday afternoon
and spend all of Friday in purchasing in the metropolis whatever
was needed.The only person who was really sober was Mrs.Rover, for she hated
to see her husband start on such a journey, which was bound to, be
full of grave perils."I am afraid you will never come back," she said, with tears in
her eyes."And if you and Anderson are both dead to me, what will
I do?""I feel certain that
a kind Providence will watch over us and bring us all back in
safety."At last the party was ready to set off.A fond good-by was said,
and away they rattled in the carryall for the railroad station at
Oak Run.shouted Tom, as he waved his cap to his aunt,
who stood beside the gateway."And when we come back may we bring father with us," added Dick,
and Sam muttered an amen.The journey down to New York was without incident, and as the
Rovers had lived in the metropolis for years they felt thoroughly
at home and knew exactly where to go for their outfit and suitable
clothing for use in such a warm country was procured, and in
addition each was armed with a revolver.Rover also purchased
a shot-gun and a rifle, and likewise a number of cheap gold and
silver trinkets."The natives are becoming civilized," he explained."But, for all
that, I am certain a small gift now and then will go a long way
toward making friends."The found that the Republique was a stanch-built steamer of eight
thousand tons burden.Her captain, Jules Cambion, spoke English
quite fluently and soon made them feel at home.He was much
interested in the story Randolph Rover had to tell concerning his
missing brother."'Tis a strange happening, truly," he remarked."I sincerely
trust that your search for him proves successful and that he
returns to the arms of his family unharmed.I have visited it twice, and I know.""I am glad to learn that you have been up the Congo," replied
Randolph Rover."Perhaps during your leisure hours on the trip
you will not mind giving me such information as conics to your
mind.""I will tell you all I know willingly," answered Captain Cambion.Exactly at noon on Saturday the Republique was ready to sail, and
with a shout from those on the wharf who had come to see the few
passengers off, she sheered away and started down the bay, past
Bedloe Island and the Statue of Liberty.Before night the shore
line had faded from view, and they were standing out boldly into
the Atlantic Ocean."Off for Africa at last," murmured Sam, who had been standing at
the rail watching the last speck of land as it disappeared."What
a big trip this is going to be!""Never mind how big it is, Sam," came from Tom,  "if only it is
successful."The first few days on board were spent in settling themselves.The party had two connecting staterooms, and Mr.Rover and Sam
occupied one, while Dick and Tom had settled themselves in the
other.The passengers were mostly French people, who were going to try
their fortunes in French Congo.There was, however, one
Englishman, a man named Mortimer Blaze, who was bound out simply
for adventure."I'm tired of England, and tired of America too," he explained."I've hunted through the Rocky Mountains and up in Canada, as well
as at home, and now I'm going to try for a lion or a tiger in
Africa.""Perhaps the lion or tiger will try for you," smiled Tom."It will be a pitched battle, that's all," drawled Mortimer Blaze.He was rather a sleepy looking man, but quick to act when the
occasion demanded.The weather was all that could be wished, and during the first
week out the Republique made good progress.On a steamer there
was but little for the boys to do, and they spent all of their
spare time in reading the books on Africa which Captain Cambion
had in his library, and which were printed in English.Often they
persuaded the genial captain to tell them of his adventures in
that far-away country."You have many strange sights before you," he said to them one
day."The strange vegetation, the immense trees, the wonderful
waterfalls, some larger than your own Niagara, and then the odd
people.Some of the natives are little better than dwarfs, while
others are six feet and more in height and as straight as arrows."Did you ever hear of this King Susko?""Yes; I have heard of him several times.He is known as the
Wanderer, because he and his tribe wander from place to place,
making war on the other tribes."The captain knew nothing of Niwili Camp and expressed the opinion
that it had been, like many other camps, only a temporary affair.He said that the best the party could do was to strike straight up
the Congo, along the south shore, and question the different
natives met concerning King Susko's present whereabouts.On the beginning of the second week a storm was encountered which
lasted for three days.At first the wind blew at a lively rate,
and this was followed by thunder and lightning and a regular
deluge of rain, which made all of the boys stay below.The
steamer pitched from side to side and more than one wave broke
over her decks."This is the worse storm I ever saw," remarked Dick, as he held
fast to a chair in the cabin."They won't be able to set any
table for dinner today."came from Sam, with a groan."Who wants any dinner, when a fellow feels as if he was going to
be turned inside out!"So far none of the boys had suffered from
seasickness, but now poor Sam was catching it, and the youngest
Rover felt thoroughly miserable."Never mind, the storm won't last forever," said Dick
sympathetically."Perhaps you had better lie down, Sam.""How can I, with the ship tossing like a cork?I've got to hold
on, same as the rest, and be glad, I suppose, that I am alive,"
and poor Sam looked utterly miserable.It was very close in the cabin, but neither door nor port-hole
could be opened for fear of the water coming in.Dinner was a
farce, to use Tom's way of expressing it, for everything was cold
and had to be eaten out of hand or from a tin cup.Yet what was
served tasted very good to those who were hungry."I believe we'll go to the bottom before we are done," began Sam,
when a loud shout from the deck reached the ears of all of the
Rovers and made Tom and Dick leap to their feet.Above the wind they could hear a yell from a distance, and then
came more cries from the deck, followed by a bump on the side of
the steamer."But I guess it wasn't hard enough to do much damage.""That remains to be seen," answered Dick."Storm or no storm, I'm
gong on deck to learn what it means," and he hurried up the
companionway.CHAPTER XIII

A RESCUE IN MID-OCEAN


Dick found that he could remain on the deck only with the greatest
of difficulty.Several life lines had been stretched around and
he clung to one of these."Struck a small boat," was the answer."It had a <DW52> man in
it.But the captain thinks he may get over
it, with care," and the sailor hurried away.Dick now saw several men approaching, carrying the form of the
rescued one between them.He looked at the unconscious man and
gave a cry of amazement."I know him very well," answered Dick."He used to work at the
military academy where my brothers and I were cadets."And the
boy told Captain Cambion the particulars of Alexander Pop's
disappearance from Putnam Hall."I am glad that I will be able to
tell him that his innocence is established," he concluded."All providing we are able to bring him around to himself, Master
Rover," returned the captain gravely."You think, then, that he is in bad shape?"We will take him below and do all
we can for him."It was no easy matter to transfer Pop to one of the lower
staterooms, but once placed on a soft berth the Rovers did all
they could for him."It is like a romance," said Sam, while Randolph Rover was
administering some medicine to the unconscious man."He's been suffering from starvation," put in Dick."I suppose he
gave that yell we heard with his last breath."All of the party watched over the <DW52> man with tender care,
and feeling that he could be in no better hands the captain left
him entirely in his friends' charge."When he comes to his senses
you can let me know," he said.Dick was watching by Pop's side, and Tom was at the foot of the
berth, when the <DW52> man opened his eyes.As they rested on
first one Rover and then the other he stared in utter astonishment."Am I dreamin', or am I
back to Putnam Hall again?""You are safe on board an ocean
steamer.""An' yo'--whar yo' dun come from?""We are passengers on the steamer," said Tom."You were picked up
several hours ago.""Yes, but--but I can't undersand dis nohow!"persisted the
<DW52> man, and tried to sit up, only to fall back exhausted."Don't try to understand it, Aleck, until you are stronger," said
Dick."Anyt'ing, sah, anyt'ing!Why, I aint had, no reg'lar meal in
most a week!""Glory to Heaben dat I am
sabed!"And then he said no more for quite a long, while.The soup was already at hand, and it was Dick who fed it slowly
and carefully, seeing to it that Pop should have no more than his
enfeebled stomach could take care of, for overfeeding, so Mr.Rover had said, might kill the man.The next day Pop was able to sit up, although still too weak to
stand on his legs.He was continually praising Heaven for his
safety."I dun Vink I was a goner more dan once," he said."I was on de
ocean all alone about a week, I reckon, although I lost time ob
days after I'd been out two or Vree nights."Perhaps you were, Aleck," said Sam."But tell us how you got in
that position.""Dat am de queerest part ob it, Master Rober--de queerest part
of it.I got into de small boat fo' a sleep, and de fust Ving I
knowed I was miles an' miles away from eberyt'ing; yes, sah-miles
an' miles away on de boundless ocean, an' not so much as a fishin'
smack sail in sight.Golly, but wasn't I scared--I reckon I dun
most turn white!"And Aleck rolled his eyes around impressively."You were in a small boat attached to some steamer?"Da had been usin' de small boat fo' surnt'ing, and
left her overboard.""I don't tink I was--but I aint shuah nohow.""De Harrison, from Brooklyn, bound to Cuba.""Did you ship on her after you left Putnam Hall in such a hurry?"I did, cos I didn't want de police to coted me.But, say, as
true as I stand heah--mean sit heah--I aint guilty of stealin'
dem watches an' t'ings, no I aint!""Captain Putnam made a
great mistake when he dun suspect me.""We thought you innocent all
along, Aleck.""T'ank yo' fo' dat, Master Rober--I'se glad to see dat I'se got
one friend--"

"Three friends, Aleck--we all stood up for you," interrupted
Tom."T'ank yo', t'ank yo'!""And we discovered who the real thief was," added Sam."Wot, yo' dun found, dat out!""An' who was de
black-hearted rascal?""Dat cadet wot tried to be funny wid me an' I had to show him his
place?Hol' on--I dun see him comin' from de attic one day.""When he must have put those stolen articles in your trunk," said
Tom."Yes, he was guilty, Captain Putnam was going to have him
arrested, but he got away."Nothing would do for Alexander Pop after this but that the boys
give him the full particulars of the affair, to which he listened
with the closest attention."Ise mighty glad I am cleared," he said."But I'd give a good
deal to face de cap'n--jest to see wot he would say, eh?""He said he was sorry he had suspected you," said Dick."What a big fool dis darkey was to run away!""I wasn't cut out fo' no sailer man.Ise been sick
most ebery day since I left shoah.By de way, whar is dis ship
bound?"Shuah yo' is foolin', Massah Dick?"We and our uncle are bound for the Congo River."Dat's whar my great gran' fadder dun come from--so I
heard my mammy tell, years ago.I don't want to go dar, not me!""I don't see how you are going to help yourself, Aleck.The first
stop this steamer will make will be at Boma on the Congo River.""'Wot am I to do when I gits dar?Perhaps the captain will let you remain
on the Republique."I don't t'ink I could stand dat.An'
what am yo' going to do in Africa?""We are going on a hunt for my father, who has been missing for
years."Again Aleck had to be told the particulars and again he was
tremendously interested.When the boys had finished he sat in
silence for several minutes."I've got it-jest de t'ing!"Foah gen'men like yo' don't want to
go to Africa widout a valet nohow.Let me be de workin' man fe de
crowd.I'll take de job, cheap,--an' glad ob de chance.""Hullo, that's an idea!""Will yo' do it, Massah Dick?""We'll have to speak to my uncle about it first.""Well, yo' put in a good word fo' me.Yo know I always stood by
yo' in de school," pleaded the <DW52> man."I don't want to be
driftin' around jess nowhar, wid nuffin to do, an' no money comin'
in--not but what I'll work cheap, as I dun said I would," he
added hastily.A little later Randolph Rover joined the group and Aleck's
proposition was laid before him.Strange to say he accepted the
<DW52> man's offer immediately, greatly to the wonder of the
boys, and from that minute on Pop be came a member of the
searching party."I will tell you why I did it," explained Randolph Rover to the
boys in private."When we get into the jungle we will need a man
we can trust and one who is used to American ways.Moreover, if
there is any spying to be done among the natives the chances are
that a black man can do it better than a white man.""Uncle Randolph, you've got a long head," remarked Tom."No doubt
Aleck will prove just the fellow desired."And Tom was right, as
later events proved.CHAPTER XIV

A STRANGE MEETING IN BOMA


The storm delayed the passage of the Republique nearly a week, in
a manner that was totally unexpected by the captain.The fierce
waves, running mountain high, wrenched the screw and it was found
next to impossible to repair the accident.Consequently the
steamer had to proceed under a decreased rate of speed.This was tantalizing to the boys, and also to Randolph Rover, for
everyone wished to get ashore, to start up the Congo as early as
possible.But all the chafing in the world could not help
matters, and they were forced to take things as they came.A place was found among the sailors for Aleck, and soon he began
to feel like himself once more.But the sea did not suit the
<DW52> man, and he was as anxious as his masters to reach shore
once more."It's a pity da can't build a mighty bridge over de ocean, an' run
kyars," he said."Perhaps they'll have a bridge some day resting on boats, Aleck,"
answered Tom."But I don't expect to live to see it.""Yo' don't know about dat, chile.Did
yo'gran'fadder expect to ride at de rate ob sixty miles an hour?Did he expect to send a telegram to San Francisco in a couple ob
minutes?Did he eber dream ob talkin' to sumboddy in Chicago froo
a telephone?Did he knew anyt'ing about electric lights, or
movin' pictures, or carriages wot aint got no bosses, but run wid
gasoline or sumfing like dat?I tell yo, Massah Tom, we don't
know wot we is comin' to!""You are quite right, Alexander," said Mr.Rover, who had
overheard the talk.Some
day I expect to grow com and wheat, yes, potatoes and other
vegetables, by electricity," and then Randolph Rover branched off
into a long discourse on scientific farming that almost took away
poor Aleck's breath."He's a most wonderful man, yo' uncle!"whispered the <DW52> man
to Sam afterward."Fust t'ing yo' know he'll be growin' corn in
de com crib already shucked!"On and on over the mighty Atlantic bounded the steamer.One day
was very much like another, excepting that on Sundays there was a
religious service, which nearly everybody attended.The boys had
become quite attached to Mortimer Blaze and listened eagerly to
the many hunting tales he had to tell."I wish you were going with us," said Tom to him."I like your
style, as you Englishman put it.""Thanks, Rover, and I must say I cotton to you, as the Americans
put it," laughed the hunter."Well, perhaps we'll meet in the
interior, who knows?"I am hoping to meet some friends at Boma.The steamer bad now struck the equator, and as it was midsummer
the weather was extremely warm, and the smell of the oozing tar,
pouring from every joint, was sickening."Dis am jest right," he said."I could sleep eall de time,
'ceptin' when de meal gong rings.""When you land,
Alexander, you ought to feel perfectly at home.""Perhaps, sah; but I dun reckon de United States am good enough
for any man, sah, white or.""It's the greatest country on the
globe."It was a clear day a week later when the lookout announced land
dead ahead.It proved to be a point fifteen miles above the mouth
of the Congo, and at once the course was altered to the southward,
and they made the immense mouth of the river before nightfall.Far away dashed the waves against an
immense golden strand, backed up by gigantic forests of tropical
growth and distant mountains veiled in a bluish mist: The river
was so broad that they were scarcely aware that they were entering
its mouth until the captain told them.When night came the lights of Boma could be distinctly seen,
twinkling silently over the bay of the town.They dropped anchor
among a score of other vessels; and the long ocean trip became a
thing of the past."I'm all ready to go ashore," said Tom."My, but won't it feel good to put foot on land again!""The ocean is all well enough, but
a fellow doesn't want too much of it.""And yet I heard one of the French sailors say that he hated the
land," put in Sam."He hadn't set foot on shore for three years.When they reach port he always remains on deck duty until they
leave again."Mortimer Blaze went ashore at once, after bidding all of the party
a hearty good-by."And, anyway,
good luck to you!""Hope you bag all of the lions
and tigers you wish," and so they parted, not to meet again for
many a day.It was decided that the Rovers should not leave the ship until
morning.It can well be imagined that none of the boys slept
soundly that night.All wondered what was before them, and if
they should succeed or fail in their hunt."Dis aint much ob a town," remarked Aleck, as they landed, a
little before noon, in a hot, gentle shower of rain."There is only one New York, as there is but one London," answered
Randolph Rover."Our architecture would never do for such a hot
climate."Along the river front was a long line of squatty warehouses,
backed up by narrow and far from clean streets, where the places
of business were huddled together, and where a good share of the
trading was done on the sidewalk.The population was a very much
mixed one, but of the Europeans the English and French
predominated.The natives were short, fat, and exceedingly greasy
appearing.Hardly a one of them could speak English."I don't see any Americans," remarked Dick."I suppose--"

"There is an American store!"burst out Sam, pointing across the
way.He had discovered a general trading store, the dilapidated
sign of which read:

          SIMON HOOK,

       Dealer in Everything."I'd like to go in
and see Simon Hook.Rover was willing, and they entered the low and dingy-looking
establishment, which was filled with boxes, barrels, and bags of
goods.They found the proprietor sitting in an easy chair, his feet on a
desk, and a pipe in his mouth."That's me," was the answer; but Mr.Hook did not offer to rise,
nor indeed to even shift his position."We saw your sign and as we are Americans we thought we would drop
in," went on Mr."That's right; glad to see you," came from the man in the chair;
but still he did not offer to shift his position."It's a fool's place to come to, sonny.When these goods are sold
I'm going to quit."Simon Hook paused long enough to take an
extra whiff from his pipe."We are on a hunt for a missing man," answered Randolph Rover.His name is Anderson Rover, and he is my
brother."He was a gold hunter from Californy, or somethin' like that.""Went up the Congo four or five years ago--maybe longer?"He had lots of money, and took several guides
and a number of other, natives along.""Have you seen or heard of him since?""Because them as goes up the Congo never, comes back.It's a
fool's trip among those wild people of the interior.Stanley went
up, but look at the big party he took with him and the many fights
he had to get back alive."At this announcement the hearts of the Rover boys fell.I reckon he's either lost in the jungle or
among the mountains, or else the natives have taken care of him.""Did he say anything about the trail he was going to take?""He was going to take the Rumbobo trail, most all of 'em do.""Say, can I sell you any of these
old things of mine cheap?""Glad to see you," and as they left the shopkeeper waved them a
pleasant adieu with his hand."I guess he has grown tired of trying to sell goods," observed
Tom."Perhaps he knows that if folks want the things he has to sell
they are bound to come to him," said Dick."His store seems to
be the only one of its sort around."The hotel for which they were bound was several squares away,
located in something of a park, with pretty flowers and a
fountain.It was a two-story affair, with spacious verandas and
large rooms, and frequented mostly by English and French people.They had just entered the office; and Randolph Rover was writing
his name in the register, when Dick caught sight of somebody in
the reading room that nearly took away his breath.It is Dan Baxter--Dan
Baxter, just as sure as you are born!"CHAPTER XV

CAPTAIN VILLAIRE'S LITTLE PLOT


Dick was right: the boy in the reading-room' was indeed Dan Baxter,
but so changed in appearance that for the minute neither Tom nor
Sam recognized him.In the past Baxter had always been used to fine clothing, which he
had taken care should be in good repair.Now his clothing was
dilapidated and his shoes looked as if they were about ready to
fall apart.More than this, his face was hollow and careworn, and one eye
looked as if it had suffered severe blow of some sort.Altogether
he was most wretched-looking specimen of humanity, and it was a
wonder that he was allowed at the hotel.But the truth of the
matter was that he had told the proprietor a long tale of
sufferings in the interior and of a delayed remittance from home,
and the hotel keeper was keeping him solely on this account."He looks like a regular
tramp!""He's been in hard luck, that's certain," came from Sam."I
wonder how he drifted out here?"While Sam was speaking Dan Baxter raised his eyes from the
newspaper and glanced around.As his gaze fell upon the three
Rover boys he started and the paper fell to the floor, then he got
up and strode toward them."From Putnam Hall, Baxter," answered Dick quietly.Ordinarily Dan Baxter would have retorted that that was none of
Dick's business, but now he was in thoroughly low spirits, and he
answered meekly:

"I've been playing in hard luck.I went down to New York and one
night when I was in a sailors' boarding house I drank more than
was good for me, and when I woke up in the morning I found myself
on a vessel bound for Africa.""You were shanghaied as a sailor?""That's it, and while I was on board the Costelk the captain and
mate treated me worse than a dog.The captain did
that, and when I struck back he put me in irons and fed me nothing
but stale biscuits and water.""No; she was bound for Cape Town, but stopped here for supplies,
and I jumped overboard at night and swam ashore, and here I am,
and sorry for it," and Dan Baxter drew a long breath.The Rovers were astonished at his meek manner.Was this really
the domineering Baxter, who had always insisted on having his own
way, and who had done so many wrong deeds in the past?"You've had a hard time of it, I suppose?said Dick, hardly
knowing how to go on."Hard, Dick, aint no word," came from the former bully of Putnam
Hall."I've run up against the worst luck that anybody could ever
imagine.But I reckon you don't care about that?""Do you think we ought to care, Baxter?""Well, it aint fair to take advantage of a chap when he's down on
his luck," grumbled the former bully."I guess I've learnt my
lesson all right enough.""Do you mean to say you are going to turn over a new leaf?""Yes, if I ever get the chance."Randolph Rover now joined the group, and Dick explained the
situation.Rover questioned Baxter closely and found that he
was without a cent in his pocket and that the hotel keeper had
threatened to put him out if he was not able to pay up inside of
the next twenty-four hours."See here, Baxter, you never were my friend, and you never
deserved any good from me, but I don't like to see a dog suffer,"
said Dick."I'll give you thirty shillings, and that will help
you along a little," and he drew out his purse."And I'll give you the same," came from Tom."But don't forget that what Dick says
is true, nevertheless."Ninety English shillings--about twenty-two dollars of our money--was
more cash than Dan Baxter had seen in some time, his other
money having been spent before he had taken his unexpected ocean
trip, and his eyes brightened up wonderfully."I'll be much obliged to you for the--the loan," he stammered."I'll pay you back some time, remember.""My advice to you is, to take the first ship you can for home.""And what brought you out here--going on a hunt for your
father?""You'll have a big job finding him.I understand the natives of
the Congo are going on the warpath before long.They have had
some difficulty with the settlers.""I guess we'll manage to take care of ourselves," answered Tom,
and then he and his brothers followed their uncle up to the rooms
which had been engaged for them during their stay in the town."He's, down in the mouth, and no mistake," was Tom's comment, when
the boys were left to themselves."I never saw him so humble
before.""Perhaps knocking around has taught him a lesson," said Dick."I
hope he really does turn over a new leaf."Randolph Rover gathered all the
information he could concerning the trail along the Congo, and
also tried to locate Niwili Camp.He likewise purchased several
additions to his outfits from Simon Hook, and engaged the services
of several natives, the leader of whom was a brawny black named
Cujo, a fellow who declared that he knew every foot of the
territory to be covered and who said he was certain that he could
locate King Susko sooner or later."Him bad man," he said soberly."No et him catch you, or you
suffer big lot!"Cujo took to Aleck from the start, and the pair
soon became warm friends.The African inspected their outfits
with interest and offered several suggestions regarding additional
purchases.Three days were spent in Boma, and during that time the Rovers saw
a good deal of Dan Baxter, who, having nothing better to do, hung
around them continually.He remained as meek as before, but our
friends did not know that this was merely the meekness of a savage
cur while under the whip.Baxter was naturally a brute, and
lacked the backbone necessary far genuine reformation."Say, why can't you take me with you?"he asked, on the day that
the Rover expedition was to start out."I'm willing to do my
share of the work and the fighting, and I won't charge you a cent
for my service.""I don't know as my uncle wants anybody along," said Sam, to whom
Baxter addressed his remarks."Well, won't you speak to him about it, Sam?I can't find
anything to do here, and the captains to whom I've applied don't
want me on their ships," pleaded the former bully of Putnam Hall.Sam was easily touched at all times, and he knew that Baxter must
feel lonely and wretched so far from home and without friends or
capital.He at once went to his brothers and his uncle and laid
the big youth's proposition before them."We don't want him," said Dick promptly."I don't believe he would be of any use to us.""I would rather give him some more money just for him to stay
behind," added Tom."Well, I don't like Baxter any more than the others do.But it
seems awfully hard on him.I don't believe he knows how to turn.""We might give him enough money to get back to the United States
with.""I'd rather have you do that, Uncle Randolph," said Dick."I
don't want him with me.""I will have a talk with the misguided boy," was the conclusion
reached by Randolph Rover; but he got no chance to speak to Dan
Baxter until late in the afternoon, and then, to his astonishment,
Baxter's manner had changed entirely, he intimating that he wanted
nothing more to do with them.For in the meantime something which was bound to be of great
importance to the Rovers had occurred.In Boma were a number of
persons of mixed French and native blood who were little better
than the old-time brigands of Italy.They were led by a wicked
wretch who went by the name of Captain Villaire.Villaire had
been watching the Rovers for two days when he noticed the coldness
which seemed to exist between, our friends and Baxter.At once he
threw himself in Baxter's way and began to it pump the youth
regarding the Americans."Zay are going into the interior, you have remarked," he said in
very bad English."Yes, they are well fixed," answered the tall youth."And zay do carry zare money wid zem?""I guess not--at least, not much of it.""Yes, I hate them," muttered Dan, and his eyes shone wickedly."I'm only treating them in a friendly way now because I'm out of
money and must do something."It ees a good head you have--verra good," murmured
Captain Villaire."Do you know, I heara dem talk about you?""De one boy say you should be in ze jail; didn't you robba
somebody.""You lika do somet'ing wid me?"continued the French native,
closing one eye suggestively.Mary went to the bedroom.He was a close reader of human
nature and had read Baxter's character as if it was an open book."We gitta dem people into trouble--maka big lot of money.""All right--I'll do anything," answered Baxter savagely."So
they said I ought to be in jail, eh?"You helpa me, I helpa you," went on the wily French native.He had his plan all ready, and, after sounding Baxter some more,
revealed what was in his mind, which was simply to follow the
Rovers into the interior and then make them prisoners.Once this
was done, they would hold the prisoners for a handsome ransom."That's a big job," answered the big youth."But I like your
plan, first-rate if you can carry it out.""I have half a dozen of ze
best of killowers-za, nevair fail me.But as you knowa dem you
will have to do ze lettair writing for us, so zat we git ze money
from zare people at home.""Trust me for that," responded Baxter quickly."You do the capturing and I'll make Mrs.Rover or
somebody else pay up handsomely, never fear."And so a compact was formed which was to give the Rovers a good
deal of trouble in the near future.CHAPTER XVI

THE START UP THE CONGO


"It was queer Dan Baxter should act so," said Sam to his uncle,
when Mr.Rover came back from his interview with the bully."I
thought he wanted to, go the worst way.""He acted as if he had struck something else," answered Randolph
Rover."He didn't even want the money I offered.Perhaps he has
received a remittance from home.""His father is still in
jail.""Perhaps he got Mumps to send it to him," said Sam."But I
forgot, Mumps is away."There was no time to discuss the situation further, for they were
to start early on the following morning, and there were yet a
dozen small matters which must be given attention.All were busy,
and it was not until after eleven that evening that they turned
in.The day for the departure from Boma dawned bright and clear, and
Cujo appeared with his assistants while they were still eating
breakfast."Werry good day for um journey," he said, with a grin."Make good
many miles if nothing go wrong.""You can't do any too well for me," answered Dick."I hope our
expedition into the interior is both short and successful."At first they had thought to go
on horseback; but this was abandoned by the advice of the native,
who declared that horses would prove more of a drag than a help in
many places."Horse canno' climb tree bridge," he explained."No climb high
rock, no go around bad hill.We go on foot an' make better time."The town was soon left behind and they struck a highway which for
several miles afforded easy traveling.On all sides were dense
groves of tropical growth, palms, mangoes, and the like, with
enormous vines festooned from one tree to the next.Underneath
were a great variety, of ferns and mosses, the homes of countless
insects and small animals.The ground was black and wherever
turned up gave forth a sickly odor of decayed vegetation."That is regular fever territory," explained Randolph Rover."Boys, do not sleep on the ground if you can possibly avoid it.I
sincerely trust that none of us take the tropical fever.""If I feel it coming on I'll take a good dose of quinine,"
declared Tom.Fortunately they had brought along a good supply of that valuable
drug.On one side
of the highway was the broad river, which glinted like molten lead
in the sunshine.They could not travel very close to its bank,
for here the ground was uncertain.Once Sam left the highway to
get a better view of the stream, and, before Cujo noticed it,
found himself up to his knees in a muck which stuck to him like so
much glue.roared the youngest Rover, and all of the party
turned, to behold him waving his hand frantically toward them.exclaimed Aleck, and started to go
to Sam's assistance, when Cujo called him back."Must be werry careful," said the native."Ground bad over
dare--lose life if urn don't have a care.And he
approached Sam by a circuitous route over the tufts of grass
which grew like so many dots amid the swamp.Soon he was close
enough to throw the youth the end of a rope he carried.The pull
that, followed nearly took Sam's arms out by the sockets; but the
boy was saved, to return to the others of the party with an
experience which was destined to be very useful to him in, the
future."It will teach me to be careful of where I am going after this,"
he declared."Why, that bog looked almost as safe as the ground
over here!""Tropical places are all full of just such treacherous swamps,"
returned Randolph Rover."It will be wise for all of us to
remember that we are now in a strange territory and that we must
have our eyes and ears wide open."At half-past eleven they came to a halt for dinner.The sun was
now almost overhead, and they were glad enough to seek the shelter
of a number of palms standing in front of a--native hostelry."We will rest here until two o'clock," said Mr."It is all
out of the question to travel in the heat of the day, as we did
yesterday, in such a climate as this.They found the hostelry presided over by a short, fat native who
scarcely spoke a word of English.But he could speak French, and
Mr.Rover spoke to him in that language, while Cujo carried on a
talk in the native tongue.The midday repast was cooked over a
fire built between several stones.The boys watched the cooking
process with interest and were surprised to find, when it came to
eating, that the food prepared tasted so good.They had antelope
steak and a generous supply of native bread, and pure cocoa, which
Tom declared as good as chocolate.After the meal they took it easy in a number of grass hammocks
stretched beneath the wide spreading palms surrounding the wayside
inn, if such it might be called.Aleck and Cujo fell to smoking
and telling each other stories, while the Rovers dozed away, lulled
to sleep by the warm, gentle breeze which was blowing."I don't wonder the natives are lazy," remarked Dick, when his
uncle aroused him."I rarely slept in the daytime at home, and
here I fell off without half trying.""The climate is very enervating, Dick.That is why this section
of the globe makes little or no progress toward civilization.Energetic men come here, with the best intention in the world of
hustling, as it is termed, but soon their ambition oozes out of
them like--well, like molasses out of a barrel lying on a hot
dock in the sun.he called out, and soon the party was on
its way again.The highway was still broad, but now it was not as even as before,
and here and there they had to leap over just such a treacherous
swamp as had caused Sam so much trouble."It's a good thing we
didn't bring the horses," said Mr."I didn't think so
before, but I do now."The jungle was filled with countless birds, of all sorts, sizes,
and colors.Some of these sang in a fairly tuneful fashion, but
the majority uttered only sounds which were as painful to the
hearing as they were tiresome."The sound is enough to drive a nervous fellow crazy," declared
Tom."It's a good thing nature fixed it so that a man can't grow
up nervous here.""Perhaps those outrageous cries are meant to wake a chap up,"
suggested Dick."I've a good mind to shoot some of the little pests.""You may take a few shots later on and see what you can bring down
for supper," answered his uncle."But just now let us push on as
fast as we can.""Remember we are out here to find father, not
to hunt.""As if I would ever forget that," answered Dick, with a
reproachful glance.They were now traveling a bit of a hill which took them, temporarily,
out of sight of the Congo.Cujo declared this was a short route
and much better to travel than the other.The way was through a
forest of African teak wood, immense trees which seemed to tower
to the very skies."They are as large as the immense trees of California of which you
have all heard," remarked Randolph Rover."It is a very useful
wood, used extensively in ship building.""After all, I think a boat on the Congo would have been better to
use than shoe leather," said Sam, who was beginning to grow tired."No use a boat when come to falls," grinned Cujo.Aleck had been dragging behind, carrying a heavy load, to which
he was unaccustomed.Now he rejoined the others with the
announcement that another party was in their rear."They are on foot, too," he said."Cujo whar you dun t'ink da be
gwine?""To the next settlement, maybe," was Randolph Rover's comment,
and Cujo nodded.They waited a bit for the other party to come up, but it did not,
and, after walking back, Cujo returned with the announcement that
they were nowhere in sight."Perhaps they turned off on a side road," said Tom, and there the
matter was dropped, to be brought to their notice very forcibly
that night.Evening found them at another hostelry, presided over by a
Frenchman who had a giant negress for a wife.The pair were a
crafty looking couple, and did not at all please the Rovers."Perhaps we may as well sleep with one eye open tonight," said
Randolph Rover, upon retiring."We are in a strange country, and
it's good advice to consider every man an enemy until he proves
himself a friend."The hostelry was divided into half a dozen rooms, all on the
ground floor.The Rovers were placed in two adjoining apartments,
while the natives and Aleck were quartered in an addition of
bamboo in the rear."Keep your eyes and ears open, Aleck," whispered Dick, on
separating from the faithful <DW52> man."And if you find
anything wrong let us know at once.""Do you suspect anyt'ing, Massah Rober?"Something in the air seems to tell me that
everything is not as it should be.""Dat Frenchman don't look like no angel, sah," and Aleck shook his
head doubtfully."You're right, Aleck, and his wife is a terror, or else I miss my
guess.""Dat's right, Massah Rober; nebber saw sech sharp eyes.Yes, I'll
look out-fo' my own sake as well as fo' de sake ob Ye and de
rest," concluded Aleck.CHAPTER XVII

THE ATTACK AT THE HOSTELRY


The night was exceptionally cool for that locality; and, utterly
worn out by their tiresome journey, all of the Rovers slept more
soundly than they had anticipated.Dick had scarcely dropped off when he heard a
noise at the doorway, which was covered with a rough grass
curtain."Dat's all right," came in a whisper from Aleck."Is dat yo',
Massah Dick?""I dun discovered somet'ing, sah.""Dat udder party dun come up an' is in de woods back ob dis,
house.""No; dare is a Frenchman wot is talkin' to dah chap wot runs dis
shebang, sah.""Perhaps he wants accommodations," mused Dick."Can't say about dat, sah.But de fellers who come up hab a lot
ob ropes wid 'em."came sleepily from Tom, and presently Randolph
Rover and Sam likewise awoke.In a few words the <DW52> man explained the situation.He had
just finished when the wife of the proprietor of the resort came
up to the doorway."The gentleman is wanted outside by my husband," she said in
broken French.But he says please to step out for a moment."Rover repeated the woman's words to the boys."I tell you something is wrong," declared Dick."But what can be wrong, my lad?""If you go outside I'll go with you, Uncle Randolph.""Well, you can do that if you wish."The pair arose and speedily slipped on the few garments which they
had taken off."Do you think it is as bad as that?"But I'm going to take uncle's advice
and count every man an enemy until he proves himself a friend."Rover and Dick were ready to go out, and they did so,
followed by Aleck and preceded by the native woman.As it was
dark the Rovers easily concealed their weapons in the bosoms of
their coats.They walked past the bamboo addition and to the grove of trees
Aleck had mentioned.There they found the Frenchman in
conversation with Captain Villaire."Very much," answered Villaire in French."And this is one of your nephews?""I believe you are hunting for the young man's father?""He is, then,
alive?""Yes; but a prisoner, and very sick.He heard of your being in
Boma by accident through a native of King Susko's tribe who was
sent to the town for some supplies.I heard the story and I have
been employed to lead you to him, and at once.""But--but this is marvelous," stammered Randolph Rover."I must
say I do not understand it.""It is a very queer turn of affairs, I admit.Rover
must explain to you when you meet.He wishes you to come to him
alone.As well as he was able Randolph Rover explained matters to Dick.In the meantime, however, the youth had been looking around
sharply and had noted several forms gliding back and forth in the
gloom under the trees."Uncle Randolph, I don't believe this man," he said briefly."The
story he tells is too unnatural.""I think so myself, Dick; but still--"

"Why didn't this man come straight to the house to tell us this?"Randolph Rover put the question to Captain Villaire.The
Frenchman scowled deeply and shrugged his shoulders."I had my
reason," he said briefly.Before Randolph Rover could answer there came a shout from behind
several trees.repeated Dick, when of a sudden a half dozen men rushed
at him and Randolph Rover and surrounded the pair.In a twinkle,
before either could use his pistol, he was hurled flat and made a
prisoner."Bind them, men," ordered Villaire sternly."And bind them well,
so that escape is impossible."yelled, out Dick, before those on top
of him could choke him off.And off he sped at top
speed, with three or four of Captain Villaire's party after him.Cujo also went to the house, bewildered by what was going on and
hardly knowing how to turn.Randolph Rover fought desperately and so did Dick.But the two
were no match for the six men who had attacked them, and ere they
knew it the Rovers were close prisoners, with their hands bound
behind them and each with a dirty gag of grass stuffed in his
mouth."Now march, or you will be shot," came in bad English from one of
the Villaire party.And as there seemed nothing better to do they
marched, wondering why they had been attacked and where they were
to be taken.Their arms had been confiscated, so further
resistance was useless.When Dick lagged behind he received a
cruel blow on the back which nearly sent him headlong.A journey of several hours brought the party to a small clearing
overlooking the Congo at a point where the bank was fully fifty
feet above the surface of the stream.Here, in years gone by, a
rough log hut had been built, which the African International
Association had once used as a fort during a war with the natives.The log hut was in a state of decay, but still fit for use and
almost hidden from view by the dense growth of vines which covered
it.The men who had brought Randolph Rover and Dick hither evidently
knew all about the hut, for they proceeded to make themselves at
home without delay.Taking the Rovers into one of the apartments
of the dilapidated building they tied each to the logs of the
walls, one several yards from the other."Now you must wait until Captain Villaire returns," said the
leader of the party in French."He will tell you what it means," grinned the brigand, and walked
away to another part of the hut, which was built in a long,
rambling fashion, and contained a dozen or more divisions."We are in a pickle," remarked Dick dismally."This is hunting
up father with a vengeance."But I would like to know what this
means.""It probably means robbery, for one thing, Uncle Randolph."If I am not mistaken I saw some of these rascals hanging around
the hotel in Boma."They have been watching their chance
to attack us ever since we left the town."Slowly the hours wore away until morning dawned.The positions of
both Dick and his uncle were most uncomfortable ones, and the
youth was ready to groan aloud at the strain put upon his
shoulders through having his arms tied behind him.At last they heard footsteps approaching from the opposite end of
the rambling building.He had scarcely spoken when Captain Villaire appeared, followed
by--Dan Baxter!CHAPTER XVIII

A DEMAND OF IMPORTANCE


Dick could scarcely believe the evidence of his own eyesight as he
gazed at the former bully of Putnam Hall and the Frenchman who
stood beside him."Well, that's a good one, I must
say."He is in with these rascals who have captured us," came quickly
from Dick."This is how you repay our kindness, Baxter?"Didn't I refuse your
offer, made just before you went away?""But you didn't refuse the first money we gave you, Baxter.""We won't talk about that, Dick
Rover.Do you realize that you are absolutely in my power?"It was not you who captured us, Baxter.""Well, it amounts to the same thing, eh, Capitan Villaire?"and
the big boy turned to the French brigand, who nodded."Ve will not speak of zem udders," broke in Captain Villaire."Did Baxter put up this plot against us?"To be sure I did," answered Baxter, who loved to brag just as
much as ever."And before I let you go I'm going to make you pay up dearly for
all that I have suffered.Captain Villaire, have you had them
searched?""Yees, Baxter, but za had not mooch monish wid zem.""Then they left it behind at Binoto's place," was the quick
answer."Now if those others aren't captured--"

"Hush, ve vill not speak of zat," put in the brigand hastily."Tell zeni what I haf tole you."Dan Baxter turned once more to the
prisoners."Do you know why you were brought here?""To be robbed, I presume," answered Randolph Rover."Or that and worse," said Dick significantly,

"I reckon I have a right to all of your money, Dick Rover.""I don't see how you make that out, Baxter.""Years ago your father robbed mine out of the rights to a rich
gold mine in the United States."I claim, and so did my father,
that the mine was ours."The mine was discovered by my fattier, and if
everything had gone right he would have had the income from it."What do you
intend to do with us?""We intend to make money out of you," was the answer, given with a
rude laugh."First you will have to answer a few questions.""Zat ees it," put in Captain Villaire."How mooch morlish you
bring wid you from America?""We didn't bring much," answered Randolph Rover, who began to
smell a mouse."You leave zat in Boma, wid ze bankers, eh?""But you haf von big lettair of credit, not so?""Yes, we have a letter of credit," answered Randolph Rover."But
that won't do you any good, nor the money at the banker's
neither.""Ve see about zat, monsieur.Proceed," and Captain Villaire waved
his hand toward Dan Baxter."This is the situation in a nutshell, to come right down to
business," said the former bully of Putnam Hall coolly."You are
our prisoners, and you can't get away, no matter how hard you try.Captain Villaire and his men, as well as myself, are in this
affair to make money.The question is, what is your liberty worth
to you?""So you intend to work such a game?""Well, I shan't pay you a cent.""Don't be a fool, Dick Rover."Well, I haven't any money, and that ends it."Then you will have to foot the bill," continued Dan Baxter,
turning to Randolph Rover."If you value your liberty you will pay us what we demand.""We demand twenty thousand dollars--ten thousand for the liberty
of each."This demand nearly took away Randolph Rover's breath.You are worth a good deal more than that, Mr.And
I am demanding only what is fair.""Perhaps you'll sing a different tune in a few, days--after your
stomachs get empty," responded Dan Baxter, with a malicious gleam
in his fishy eyes."So you mean to starve us into acceding to your
demands," said Dick."Baxter, I always did put you down as a
first-class rascal.If you keep, on, you'll be more of a one than
your father."In high rage the former bully of Putnam Hall strode forward and
without warning struck the defenseless Dick a heavy blow on the
cheek."That, for your impudence," he snarled."You keep a civil tongue
in your head.If you don't--"  He finished with a shake of his
fist."You had bettair make up your mind to pay ze monish," said Captain
Villaire, after a painful pause."It will be ze easiest way out
of ze situation for you.""Don't you pay a cent, Uncle Randolph," interrupted Dick quickly.Then Baxter hit him again, such a stinging blow that he almost
lost consciousness."He is tied up, otherwise you
would never have the courage to attack him.Baxter, have you no
spirit of fairness at all in your composition?""Don't preach--I won't listen to it!""You
have got to pay that money.If you don't--well, I don't believe
you'll ever reach America alive, that's all."With these words Dan Baxter withdrew, followed by Captain
Villaire.They value their lives too much to
refuse.Just wait until they have suffered the pangs of hunger
and thirst, and you'll see how they change their tune.""You are certain za have ze monish?"It will only be a question of waiting for
the money after they send for it.""Neither will I--if we are safe here.You don't think anybody
will follow us?""Not unless za find ze way up from ze rivair.Za cannot come here
by land, because of ze swamps," answered the Frenchman."And ze
way from ze rivair shall be well guarded from now on," he added.CHAPTER XIX

WHAT HAPPENED TO TOM AND SAM


Let us return to Tom and Sam, at the time they were left alone at
Binoto's hostelry."I wish we had gone with Dick and Uncle Randolph," said Tom, as he
slipped into his coat and shoes."I don't like this thing at
all.""Oh, don't get scared before you are hurt, Tom!""These people out here may be peculiar, but--"

Sam did not finish.A loud call from the woods had reached his
ears, and in alarm he too began to dress, at the same time
reaching for his pistol and the money belt which Randolph Rover
had left behind."I--I guess something is wrong," he went on, after a pause."If
we--"

"Tom!came from Aleck, and in a
second more the <DW64>, burst on their view."Come, if yo' is
dressed!"And
Aleck almost dragged the boy along.The Rover boys could readily surmise that Aleck would not act in
this highly excited manner unless there was good cause for it.Consequently, as Sam said afterward, "They didn't stand on the
order of their going, but just flew."Pell-mell out of the
hostelry they tumbled, and ran up the highway as rapidly as their
nimble limbs would permit.They heard several men coming after them, and heard the command
"Halt!"yelled after them in both French and bad English.But
they did not halt until a sudden tumble on Tom's part made the
others pause in dismay.groaned the fun-loving Rover, and tried to
stand up."We ain't got no time ter lose!"panted Aleck, who was almost
winded."If we stay here we'll be gobbled up--in no time, dat's
shuah!""Let us try to carry Tom," said Sam, and attempted to lift his
brother up."De trees--let us dun hide in, de trees!"went on the <DW64>,
struck by a certain idea.groaned Tom, and then shut his teeth hard
to keep himself from screaming with pain.Together they carried the suffering youth away from the highway to
where there was a thick jungle of trees and tropical vines.The
vines, made convenient ladders by which to get up into the trees,
and soon Sam and Aleck were up and pulling poor Tom after them."Now we must be still," said Aleck, when they were safe for the
time being."Hear dem a-conun' dis way."The three listened and soon made out the footsteps of the
approaching party."But, oh, Aleck, what does it all mean?""It means dat yo' uncle an' Dick am prisoners--took by a lot of
rascals under a tall, Frenchman.""Yes, but I don't understand--"

"No more do I, Massah Sam, but it war best to git out, dat's as
shuah as yo' is born," added the <DW52> man solemnly.Poor Torn was having a wretched time of it with his ankle, which
hurt as badly as ever and had begun to swell.As he steadied
himself on one of the limbs of the tree Sam removed his shoe,
which gave him a little relief.From a distance came a shouting, and they made out through the
trees the gleam of a torch.But soon the sounds died out and the
light disappeared."One thing is certain, I can't walk just yet," said Tom."When I
put my foot down it's like a thousand needles darting through my
leg.""Let us go below and hunt up some water," said Sam; and after
waiting a while longer they descended into the small brush.Aleck
soon found a pool not far distant, and to this they carried Tom,
and after all had had a drink, the swollen ankle was bathed, much
to the sufferer's relief.As soon as the sun was
up Aleck announced that he was going back to the hostelry to see
how the land lay."But don't expose yourself," said Tom."I am certain now that is
a regular robbers' resort, or worse."Aleck was gone the best part of three hours.When he returned he
was accompanied by Cujo.The latter announced that all of the
other natives had fled for parts unknown."The inn is deserted," announced Aleck.Even that <DW52> wife of
the proprietor is gone."And did you find any trace of Dick and my uncle?""We found out where dat struggle took place," answered, Aleck."And Cujo reckons as how he can follow de trail if we don't wait
too long to do it.""Must go soon," put in Cujo for himself."Maybe tomorrow come big storm--den track all washed away.""You can go on, but you'll have to
leave me behind.I couldn't walk a hundred yards for a barrel of
gold.""Oh, we can't think of leaving you behind!""I'll tell you wot--Ise dun carry him, at least fe a spell,"
said Aleck, and so it was arranged.Under the new order of things Cujo insisted on making a scouting
tour first, that he might strike the trail before carrying them
off on a circuitous route, thus tiring Aleck out before the real
tracking began.The African departed, to be gone the best Part of an hour.When
he came back there was a broad grin of satisfaction on his homely
features."Cujo got a chicken," he announced, producing the fowl."And here
am some werry good roots, too.Now va dinner befo' we start out."cried Pop, and began to start up a fire
without delay, while Cujo cleaned the fowl and mashed up the
roots, which, when baked on a hot stone, tasted very much like
sweet potatoes.The meal was enjoyed by all, even Tom eating his
full share in spite of his swollen ankle, which was now gradually
resuming its normal condition.Cujo had found the trail at a distance of an eighth of a mile
above the wayside hostelry."Him don't lead to de ribber dare,"
he said."But I dun think somet'ing of him."asked Tom, from his seat on Aleck's
back."I t'ink he go to de kolobo.""De kolobo old place on ribber-place where de white soldiers shoot
from big fort-house.""But would the authorities allow, them to go
there?""No soldiers dare now--leave kolobo years ago.Well, follow the trail as best you can--and we'll see
what we will see.""And let us get along just as fast as we can," added Sam.On they went through a forest that in spots was so thick they
could scarcely pass.The jungle contained every kind of tropical
growth, including ferns, which were beautiful beyond description,
and tiny vines so wiry that they cut like a knife."But I suppose it doesn't hold a
candle to what is beyond.""Werry bad further on," answered Cujo."See, here am de trail,"
and he pointed it out.Several miles were covered, when they came to a halt in order to
rest and to give Aleck a let up in carrying Tom.The youth now
declared his foot felt much better and hobbled along for some
distance by leaning on Sam's shoulder.Presently they were startled by hearing a cry from a distance.They listened intently, then Cujo held up his hand."Me go an' see about dat," he said."Keep out ob sight, all ob
you!"And he glided into the bushes with the skill and silence of
a snake.Another wait ensued, and Tom improved the time by again bathing
his foot in a pool which was discovered not far from where Cujo
had left them.The water seemed to do much good, and the youth
declared that by the morrow he reckoned he would be able to do a
fair amount of walking if they did not progress too rapidly."I declare they could burn wood night and day for a century and
never miss a stick.""I thought I heard some monkeys chattering a while ago," answered
Sam."I suppose the interior is alive with them.""I dun see a monkey lookin' at us now, from dat tree," observed
Aleck."See dem shinin' eyes back ob de leaves?"He pointed with
his long forefinger, and both, boys gazed in the direction.He started back and the others did the same.And they were none
too soon, for an instant later the leaves were thrust apart and a
serpent's form appeared, swaying slowly to and fro, as if
contemplating a drop upon their very heads!CHAPTER XX

THE FIGHT AT THE OLD FORT


For the instant after the serpent appeared nobody spoke or moved.The waving motion of the reptile was fascinating to the last
degree, as was also that beady stare from its glittering eyes.The stare was fixed upon poor Tom, and having retreated but a few
feet, he now stood as though rooted to the spot.Slowly the form
of the snake was lowered, until only the end of its tail kept it
up on the tree branch.Then the head and neck began to swing back
and forth, in a straight line with Tom's face.The horrible fascination held the poor, boy as by a spell, and he
could do nothing but look at those eyes, which seemed to bum
themselves upon his very brain.Closer and closer, and still
closer, they came to his face, until at last the reptile prepared
to strike.It was Sam's pistol that spoke up, at just the right
instant, and those beady eyes were ruined forever, and the wounded
head twisted in every direction, while the body of the serpent,
dropping from the tree, lashed and dashed hither and thither in
its agony.Then the spell was broken, and Tom let out such a yell
of terror as had never before issued from his lips.came a second shot from Sam's pistol.But the serpent was
moving around too rapidly for a good aim to be taken, and only the
tip of the tail was struck.Then, in a mad, blind fashion, the
snake coiled itself upon Aleck's foot, and began, with
lightning-like rapidity, to encircle the <DW52> man's body.shrieked Aleck, trying to pull the snake off with his
hands.or Ise a dead man, shuah!""Catch him by the neck, Aleck!"ejaculated Tom, and brought out
his own pistol.Watching his chance, he pulled the trigger twice,
sending both bullets straight through the reptile's body.Then
Sam fired again, and the mangled head fell to the ground.But dead or alive the body still encircled Aleck, and the
contraction threatened to cave in the <DW52> man's ribs.went Tom's pistol once more, and now the snake had
evidently had enough of it, for it uncoiled slowly and fell to the
ground in a heap, where it slowly shifted from one spot to another
until life was extinct.But neither the boys nor the <DW52> man
waited to see if it was really dead.Instead, they took to their
heels and kept on running until the locality was left a
considerable distance behind."That was a close shave," said Tom, as he dropped on the ground
and began to nurse his lame ankle once more.but that snake
was enough to give one the nightmare!""Don't say a word," groaned Aleck, who had actually turned pale."I vought shuah I was a goner, I did fo' a fac'!I don't want to
meet no mo' snakes!"The two boys reloaded their pistols with all rapidity, and this
was scarcely accomplished when they heard Cujo calling to them.When told of what had
happened he would not believe the tale until he had gone back to
look at the dead snake."Him big wonder um snake didn't kill
all of yo'!"He had located Captain
Villaire's party at the old fort, and said that several French
brigands were on guard, by the trail leading from the swamp and at
the cliff overlooking the river."I see white boy dare too," he added."Same boy wot yo' give
money to in Boma.""Can it be possible that he is
mixed up in this affair?""I can't understand it at all," returned Tom."But the question
is, now we have tracked the rascals, what is to be done next?"After a long talk it was resolved to get as close to the old fort
as possible.Cujo said they need not hurry, for it would be best
to wait until nightfall before making any demonstration against
their enemies.The African was very angry to think that the other
natives had deserted the party, but this anger availed them
nothing.Four o'clock in the afternoon found them on the edge of the swamp
and not far from the bank of the Congo.Beyond was the cliff,
overgrown in every part with rank vegetation, and the ever-present
vines, which hung down like so many ropes of green."If we want to get up the wall we won't want any scaling ladders,"
remarked Tom grimly."Oh, if only we knew that Dick and Uncle
Randolph were safe!""I'm going to find out pretty soon," replied Sam."I'll tell you
what I think.But I didn't dream of such a thing
being done down here although, I know it is done further north in
Africa among the Moors and Algerians."Cujo now went off on another scout and did not return until the
sun was setting."I can show you a way up de rocks," he said."We can get to the
walls of um fort, as you call um, without being seen."Soon night was upon them, for in the tropics there is rarely any
twilight.Tom now declared himself able to walk once more, and
they moved off silently, like so many shadows, beside the swamp
and then over a fallen palm to where a series of rocks, led up to
the cliff proper.They came to a halt, and through the gloom saw a solitary figure
sitting on a rock.The sentinel held a gun over his knees and was
smoking a cigarette."If he sees us he will give the alarm," whispered Tom."Can't we
capture him without making a noise?""Dat's de talk," returned Aleck."Cujo, let us dun try dat
trick.""Urn boys stay here," he said.And off he crawled through the wet grass, taking a circuitous
route which brought him up on the sentinel's left.As he did so Cujo leaped
from the grass and threw him to the earth.Then a long knife
flashed in the air."No speak, or um diet" came softly; but, the
Frenchman realized that the African meant what he said.he growled, in the language of the African.Cujo let out a low whistle, which the others rightly guessed was a
signal for them to come up.Finding himself surrounded, the
Frenchman gave up his gun and other weapons without a struggle.He could talk no English, so what followed had to be translated by
Cujo."Yes, de man an' boy are dare," explained Cujo, pointing to the
fort."Da chained up, so dis rascal say.De captain ob de band
want heap money to let um go.""Ask him how many of the band there are," asked Sam.But at this question the Frenchman shook his head.Either he did
not know or would not tell.After a consultation the rascal was made to march back to safer
ground.Then he was strapped to a tree and gagged.The straps
were not fastened very tightly, so that the man was sure to gain
his liberty sooner or later."If we didn't come back and he was
too tight he might starve to death," said Tom."Not but wot he deserves to starve," said Aleck, with a scowl at
the crestfallen prisoner.At the foot of the cliff all was as dark and silent as a tomb."We go slow now, or maybe take a big tumble," cautioned Cujo."Perhaps him better if me climb up first," and he began the
dangerous ascent of the cliff by means of the numerous vines
already mentioned.He was halfway up when the others started after him, Sam first,
Tom next, and Aleck bringing up in the rear.Slowly they arose until the surface of the stream was a score or
more of feet below them.Then came the sounds of footsteps from
above and suddenly a torch shone down into their upturned faces.came in English and the Rover boys recognized
Dan Baxter."How came you--"

"Silence, Baxter!I have a pistol and you know I am a good shot.Stand where you an and put both hands over your head."yelled the bully, and flung his torch
straight at Tom.Then he turned and ran for the fort, giving the
alarm at the top of his lungs.The torch struck Tom on the neck, and for the moment the youth was
in danger of losing his hold on the vines and tumbling to the
jagged rocks below.But then the torch slipped away, past Sam and
Aleck, and went hissing into the dark waters of the Congo.By this time Cujo had reached the top of the cliff and was making
after Baxter.Both gained the end of the fort at the same time and
one mighty blow from Cujo's club laid Baxter senseless near the
doorway.The cry came in Dick's voice, and was plainly
heard by Sam and Tom.Then Captain Villaire appeared, and a rough
and tumble battle ensued, which the Rovers well remember to this
day.But Tom was equal to the occasion, and after the first onslaught
he turned, as if summoning help from the cliff."Tell the company to come up here and the other company
can surround the swamp!"Several pistol shots rang out, and the boys saw a Frenchman go
down with a broken arm.Then Captain Villaire shouted: "We have
been betrayed--we must flee!"The cry came in French, and as if
by magic the brigands disappeared into the woods behind the old
fort; and victory was upon the side of our friends.CHAPTER XXI

INTO THE HEART OF AFRICA


"Well, I sincerely trust we have no more such adventures."He was seated on an old bench in
one of the rooms of the fort, binding up a finger which had been
bruised in the fray.It was two hours later, and the fight had
come to an end some time previous.Nobody was seriously hurt,
although Sam, Dick, and Aleck were suffering from several small
wounds.Aleck had had his ear clipped by a bullet from Captain
Villaire's pistol and was thankful that he had not been killed.Baxter, the picture of misery, was a prisoner.The bully's face
was much swollen and one eye was in deep mourning.He sat huddled
up in a heap in a corner and wondering what punishment would be
dealt out to him."I suppose they'll kill me," he groaned, and it
may be added that he thought he almost deserved that fate."You came just in time," said Dick."Captain Villaire was about
to torture us into writing letters home asking for the money he
wanted as a ransom.Baxter put it into his head that we were very
rich.""Oh, please don't say anything more about it!""I--that Frenchman put up this job all on
his own hook.""I don't believe it," came promptly from Randolph Rover."You met
him, at Boma; you cannot deny it.""So I did; but he didn't say he was going to capture you, and I--"

"We don't care to listen to your falsehoods, Baxter," interrupted
Dick sternly.Cujo had gone off to watch Captain Villaire and his party.He now
came back, bringing word that the brigand had taken a fallen tree
and put out on the Congo and was drifting down the stream along
with several of his companions in crime."Him won't come back," said the tall African."Him had enough of
urn fight."Nevertheless the whole party remained on guard until morning,
their weapons ready for instant use.But no alarm came, and when
day, dawned they soon made sure that they had the entire locality
around the old fort to themselves, the Frenchman with a broken arm
having managed to crawl off and reach his friends.What to do with Dan Baxter was a conundrum."We can't take him with us, and if we leave him behind he will
only be up to more evil," said Dick."We ought to turn him over
to the British authorities.""No, no, don't do that," pleaded the tall youth."Let me go and
I'll promise never to interfere with you again.""Your promises are not worth the breath used in uttering them,"
replied Tom."Baxter, a worse rascal than you could not be
imagined.Why don't you try to turn over a new leaf?""I will--if you'll only give me one more chance," pleaded the
former bully of Putnam Hall.The matter was discussed in private and it was at last decided to
let Baxter go, providing he would, promise to return straight to
the coast."And remember," said Dick, "if we catch you following us again we
will shoot you on sight.""I won't follow--don't be alarmed," was the low answer, and then
Baxter was released and conducted to the road running down to
Boma.He was given the knife he had carried, but the Rovers kept
his pistol, that he might not be able to take a long-range shot at
them.Soon he was out of their sight, not to turn up again for a
long while to come.It was not until the heat of the day had been spent that the
expedition resumed its journey, after, an excellent meal made from
the supplies Captain Villaire's party had left behind in their
hurried flight.Some of the remaining supplies were done up into
bundles by Cujo, to replace those which had been lost when the
natives hired by Randolph Rover had deserted."It's queer we didn't see anything of that man and woman from the
inn," remarked Dick, as they set off."I reckon they got scared
at the very start."They journeyed until long after nightfall, "To make up for lost
time," as Mr.Rover expressed it, and so steadily did Cujo push on
that when a halt was called the boys were glad enough to rest.They had reached a native village called Rowimu.Here Cujo was
well known and he readily procured good accommodations for all
hands.The next week passed without special incident, excepting that one
afternoon the whole party went hunting, bringing down a large
quantity of birds, and several small animals, including an
antelope, which to the boys looked like a Maine deer excepting for
the peculiar formation of its horns.said Tom, when they were
returning to camp from the hunt."Oh, I reckon he is blasting away at game," laughed Sam, and Tom
at once groaned over the attempted joke."Perhaps we will meet him some day--if he's in this territory,"
put in Dick."But just now I am looking for nobody but father.""And so are all of us," said Tom and Sam promptly.They were getting deeper and deeper into the jungle and had to
take good care that they did not become separated.Yet Cujo said
he understood the way perfectly and often proved his words by
mentioning something which they would soon reach, a stream, a
little lake, or a series of rocks with a tiny waterfall."Been ober dis ground many times," said the guide."I suppose this is the ground Stanley covered in his famous
expedition along the Congo," remarked Dick, as they journeyed
along."But who really discovered the country, Uncle Randolph?""That is a difficult question to answer, Dick.The Portuguese,
the Spanish, and the French all claim that honor, along with the
English.I fancy different sections, were discovered by different
nationalities.This Free State, you know, is controlled by half a
dozen nations.""I wonder if the country will ever be thoroughly civilized?""It will take a long while, I am afraid.Many of the tribes in Africa are, you must
remember, without any form of religion whatever, being even worse
than what we call heathens, who worship some sort of a God."And their morality is of the lowest grade in
consequence.They murder and steal whenever the chance offers,
and when they think the little children too much care for them
they pitch them into the rivers for the crocodiles to feed upon.""Well, I reckon at that rate,
civilization can't come too quick, even if it has to advance
behind bayonets and cannon."CHAPTER XXII

A HURRICANE IN THE JUNGLE


On and on went the expedition.In the past many small towns and
villages had been visited where there were more or less white
people; but now they reached a territory where the blacks held
full sway, with--but this was rarely--a Christian missionary
among them.At all of the places which were visited Cujo inquired about King
Susko and his people, and at last learned that the African had
passed to the southeast along the Kassai River, driving before him
several hundred head of cattle which he had picked up here and
there."Him steal dat cattle," explained Cujo, "but him don't say dat
stealin', him say um--um--"

"A tax on the people?""He must be, unless he gives the people some benefit for the tax
they are forced to pay," said Tom.At one of the villages they leaned that there was another
American Party in that territory, one sent out by an Eastern
college to collect specimens of the flora of central Africa.It
was said that the party consisted of an elderly man and half a
dozen young fellows."I wouldn't mind meeting that crowd," said Sam."They might
brighten up things a bit.""Never mind; things will pick up when once we meet King Susko,"
said Dick."But I would like to know where the crowd is from and
who is in it.""It's not likely we would know them if they are from the East,"
said Sam.Two days later the storm which Cujo had predicted for some time
caught them while they were in the midst of an immense forest of
teak and rosewood.It was the middle of the afternoon, yet the
sky became as black as night, while from a distance came the low
rumble of thunder.There was a wind rushing high up in the air,
but as yet this had not come down any further than the treetops.The birds of the jungle took up the alarm and filled the forest
with their discordant cries, and even the monkeys, which were now
numerous, sit up a jabber which would have been highly trying to
the nerves of a nervous person."Yes, we catch um," said Cujo, in reply to Dick's question."Me
look for safe place too stay.""You think the storm will be a heavy one?""Werry heavy, massah; werry heavy," returned Cujo."Come wid me,
all ob you,"  and he set off on a run.All followed as quickly as they could, and soon found themselves
under a high mass of rocks overlooking the Kassai River.They had
hardly gained the shelter when the storm burst over their heads in
all of its wild fury."My, but this beats anything that I ever saw before!"cried Sam,
as the wind began to rush by them with ever-increasing velocity."Him blow big by-me-by," said Cujo with a sober face."The air was full of a moanin' sound," to use Aleck's way of
expressing it.It came from a great distance and caused the
monkeys and birds to set up more of a noise than ever.The trees
were now swaying violently, and presently from a distance came a
crack like that of a big pistol.asked Randolph Rover, and Cujo
nodded."It is a good thing, then, that we got out of the
forest.""Big woods werry dangerous in heap storm like dis," answered the
African.He crouched down between two of the largest rocks and instinctively
the others followed suit.The "moanin" increased until, with a
roar and a rush, a regular tropical hurricane was upon them.The blackness of the atmosphere was filled with flying tree
branches and scattered vines, while the birds, large and small,
swept past like chips on a swiftly flowing river, powerless to
save themselves in those fierce gusts.shouted Randolph Rover; but the roar
of the elements drowned out his voice completely.However, nobody
thought of rising, and the tree limbs and vines passed harmlessly
over their heads.The first rush of wind over, the rain began, to fall, at first in
drops as big as a quarter-dollar and then in a deluge which
speedily converted the hollows among the rocks into deep pools and
soaked everybody to his very skin.Soon the water was up to their
knees and pouring down into the river like a regular cataract."This is a soaker and no mistake," said Sam, during a brief lull
in the downpour."Why, I never saw so much water come down in my
life.""It's a hurricane," answered Randolph Rover, "It may keep on--"

He got no further, for at that instant a blinding flash of
lightning caused everybody to jump in alarm.Then came an
ear-splitting crack of thunder and up the river they saw a
magnificent baobab tree, which had reared its stately head over a
hundred feet high from the ground, come crashing down, split in
twain as by a Titan's ax.The blackened stump was left standing,
and soon--this burst into flames, to blaze away until another
downpour of rain put out the conflagration.murmured Aleck with a shiver."Ise
glad we didn't take no shelter under dat tree."He had been on the point of making some joke
about the storm, but now the fun was knocked completely out of
him.It rained for the rest of the day and all of the night, and for
once all hands felt thoroughly, miserable.Several times they
essayed to start a fire, by which to dry themselves and make
something hot to drink, but each time the rain put out the blaze.What they had to eat was not only cold, but more or less
water-soaked, and it was not until the next noon that they managed to
cook a meal.When at last the sun did come out, however, it shone, so Sam put
it, "with a vengeance."There was not a cloud left, and the
direct rays of the great orb of day caused a rapid evaporation of
the rain, so that the ground seemed to be covered with a sort of
mist.On every side could be seen the effects of the hurricane-broken
trees, washed-out places along the river, and dead birds
and small animals, including countless monkeys.The monkeys made
the boys' hearts ache, especially one big female, that was found
tightly clasping two little baby monkeys to her breast.The storm had swollen the river to such an extent that they were
forced to leave the beaten track Cujo had been pursuing and take
to another trail which reached out to the southward.Here they
passed a small village occupied entirely by <DW64>s, and Cujo
learned from them that King Susko had passed that way but five
days before.He had had no cattle with him, the majority of his
followers having taken another route.It was thought by some of
the natives that King Susko was bound for a mountain known as the
Hakiwaupi--or Ghost-of-Gold."Can that be the mountain
father was searching for when he came to Africa?"Inquiries from Cujo elicited the information that the mountain
mentioned was located about one hundred miles away, in the center
of an immense plain.It was said to be full of gold, but likewise
haunted by the ghost of a departed warrior known to the natives as
Gnu-ho-mumoli--Man-of-the-Gnu-eye."I reckon that ghost story, was started, by somebody who wanted,
to keep the wealth of che mountain to himself," observed Tom."I
don't believe in ghosts, do you, Cujo?"The tall African shrugged his ebony shoulders, "Maybe no ghost--but
if dare is, no want to see 'um," he said laconically.Nevertheless he did not object to leading them in the direction of
the supposedly haunted mountain.So far the natives had been more or less friendly, but now those
that were met said but little to Cujo, while scowls at the whites
were frequent.It was learned that the college party from the
East was in the vicinity."Perhaps they did something to offend the natives," observed
Randolph Rover."As you can see, they are simple and childlike in
their ways, and as quickly offended on one hand as they are
pleased on the other.All of you must be careful in your
treatment of them, otherwise we may get into serious trouble."CHAPTER XXIII

DICK MEETS AN OLD ENEMY


One afternoon Dick found himself alone near the edge of a tiny
lake situated on the southern border of the jungle through which
the party had passed.The others had gone up the lake shore,
leaving him to see what he could catch for supper.He had just hooked a magnificent fish of a reddish-brown color,
when, on looking up, he espied an elderly man gazing at him
intently from a knoll of water-grass a short distance away."Richard Rover, is it--ahem--possible?"came slowly from the
man's thin lips.ejaculated Dick, so surprised that he let the
fish fall into the water again."How on earth did you get out
here?""I presume I might--er--ask that same question," returned the
former teacher of Putnam Hall."Do you imagine I would be fool enough to do that, Mr.No, the Stanhopes and I were content to let you go--so long as
you minded your own business in the future.""Do not grow saucy, boy; I will not stand it.""I am not saucy, as you see fit to term it, Josiah Crabtree.You
know as well as I do that you ought to be in prison this minute
for plotting the abduction of Dora.""I know nothing of the kind, and will not waste words on you.But
if you did not follow me why are you here?""I am here on business, and not ashamed to own it."And you--did you come in search of your missing
father?"It is a long journey for one so
young.""It's a queer place for you to come to.""I am with an exploring party from Yale College.We are studying
the fauna and flora of central Africa--at least, they are doing
so under my guidance.""They must be learning a heap--under you.""Do you mean to say I am not capable of teaching them!"cried
Josiah Crabtree, wrathfully."Well, if I was in their place I would want somebody else besides
the man who was discharged by Captain Putnam and who failed to get
the appointment he wanted at Columbia College because he could not
stand the examination."fumed Crabtree,
coming closer and shaking, his fist in Dick's face."Well, I know something of your lack of ability.""You are doing your best to insult me!""Such an old fraud as you cannot be insulted, Josiah Crabtree.I
read your real character the first time I met you, and you have
never done anything since which has caused me to alter my opinion
of you.You have a small smattering of learning and you can put
on a very wise look when occasion requires.But that is all there
is to it, except that behind it all you are a thorough-paced
scoundrel and only lack a certain courage to do some daring bit of
rascality."This statement of plain truths fairly set Josiah Crabtree to
boiling with rage.He shook his fist in Dick's face again."Don't
dare to talk that way, Rover; don't dare--or--I'll--I'll--"

"What will you do?""Never mind; I'll show you when the proper time comes.""I told you once before that I was not afraid of you--and I am
not afraid of you now.""You did not come to Africa alone, did you?"I tell you that--and it's the
truth--so that you won't try any underhand game on me.""You--you--"  Josiah Crabtree broke off and suddenly grew
nervous."See here, Rover, let us be friends," he said abruptly."Let us drop the past and be friends-at least, so long as we are
so far away from home and in the country of the enemy."Certainly the man's manner would indicate as much."Well, I'm willing to let past matters, drop--just for the
present," he answered, hardly knowing what to say."I wish to pay
all my attention to finding my father.""Exactly, Richard--and--er--you--who is with you?And that black, how is it he came along?""They are a set of rich young students from Yale in their senior
year who engaged me to bring them hither for study
and--er--recreation.You will
not--ahem--say anything about the past to them, will you?"CHAPTER XXIV

JOSIAH CRABTREE MAKES A MOVE


As quick as a flash of lightning Dick saw through Josiah Crabtree's
scheme for, letting matters Of the past drop.The former teacher
of Putnam Hall was afraid the youth would hunt up the college
students from Yale and expose him to them.As a matter of fact, Crabtree was already "on the outs" with two
of the students, and he was afraid that if the truth regarding his
character became known his present position would be lost to him
and he would be cast off to shift for himself."You don't want me to speak to the students under your charge?""Oh, of course you can speak to them, if you wish.But I--ahem--I
would not care to--er--er--"

"To let them know what a rascal you are," finished Dick."Crabtree, let me tell you once for all, that you can expect no
friendship, from me.When I meet those
students I will tell them whatever I see fit."At these words Josiah Crabtree grew as white as a sheet.Then,
setting his teeth, he suddenly recovered.As was perfectly natural, Dick turned to gaze in the direction.As he did so, Crabtree swung a stick that he carried into the air
and brought it down with all force on the youth's head.Dick felt
a terrific pain, saw a million or more dancing lights flash
through his brain--and then he knew no more."I guess I've fixed him," muttered the former teacher of Putnam
Hall grimly.He knelt beside the fallen boy and felt of his
heart."Not dead, but pretty well knocked out.Now what had I
best do with him?"He thought for a moment, then remembered a deep hollow which he
had encountered but a short while before.Gazing around, to make
certain that nobody was watching him, he picked up the unconscious
lad and stalked off with the form, back into the jungle and up a
small hill.At the top there was a split between the rocks and dirt, and into
this he dropped poor Dick, a distance of twenty or more feet.Then he threw down some loose leaves and dead tree branches."Now I reckon I am getting square with those Rovers," he muttered,
as he hurried away.The others of the Rover party wondered why Dick did not join them
when they gathered around the camp-fire that night."He must be done fishing by this time," said Tom."I wonder if
anything has happened to him?""Let us take a walk up de lake an' see," put in Aleck, and the
pair started off without delay.They soon found the spot where Dick had been fishing.His rod and
line lay on the bank, just as he had dropped it upon Josiah
Crabtree's approach.Then, to Tom's astonishment, a
strange voice answered from the woods: "Here I am!"Dat aint Dick," muttered Aleck."Dat's sumbuddy else, Massah
Tom.""So it is," replied Tom, and presently saw a tall and well-built
young man struggling forth from the tall grass of the jungle.demanded the newcomer, as he stalked toward
them."I guess I can ask the same question," laughed Tom."Are you the
Dick who just answered me?"I am looking for my brother Dick, who was fishing
here a while ago.Are you one of that party of college students we
have heard about?""Yes, I'm a college student from Yale."We can't imagine what
has become of my brother Dick," he went on."Perhaps a lion ate him up," answered the Yale student."No, you
needn't smile.He used to be a teacher at the
academy I and my brothers attend."I have thought so
all along, but the others, would hardly believe it.""I am telling the truth, and can prove all I say.But just now I
am anxious about my brother.Crabtree was scared to
death and ran away.Frank Rand and I took shots at the beast, but
I can't say if we hit him.""It would be too bad if Dick dunh fell into dat lion's clutches,"
put in Aleck."I reckon de lion would chaw him up in no time.""Go back and call Cujo," said Tom."He may be able to track my
brother's footsteps."While he was gone Tom told Dick Chester
much concerning himself, and the college student related several
facts in connection with the party to which he belonged."There are six of us students," he said."We were going to have a
professor from Yale with us, but he got sick at the last moment
and we hired Josiah Crabtree.I wish we hadn't done it now, for
he has proved more of a hindrance than a help, and his real
knowledge of fauna and flora could be put in a peanut shell, with
room to spare.""He's a big brag," answered Tom."Take my advice and never trust
him too far--or you may be sorry for it."Presently Aleck came back, with Cujo following.The brawny
African began at once to examine the footprints along the lake
shore.Udder footprints walk away, but not um Massah Dick."Do you think he--fell into the lake?""Perhaps, Massah Tom--or maybe he get into boat.""I don't know of any boats around here--do
you?""No," returned the young man from Yale."But the natives living
in the vicinity may have them.""Perhaps a native dun carry him off," said Aleck."He must be
sumwhar, dat am certain.""Yes, he must be somewhere," repeated Tom sadly.By this time Sam and Randolph Rover were coming up, and also one
of Dick Chester's friends.The college students were introduced
to the others by Tom, and then a general hunt began for Dick,
which lasted until the shades of night had fallen.But poor Dick
was not found, and all wondered greatly what had, become of him.Tom and the others retired at ten o'clock.But not to sleep, for
with Dick missing none of the Rovers could close an eye."We must
find him in the morning," said Sam.CHAPTER XXV

DICK AND THE LION


When poor Dick came to his senses he was lying in a heap on the
decayed leaves at the bottom of the hollow between the rocks.The
stuff Josiah Crabtree had thrown down still lay on top, of him,
and it was a wonder that he had not been smothered.was the first thought which crossed his
confused mind.He tried to sit up, but found this impossible
until he had scattered the dead leaves and tree branches.Even
then he was so bewildered that he hardly knew what to do,
excepting to stare around at his strange surroundings.Slowly the
truth dawned upon him--how Josiah Crabtree had struck him down
on the lake shore."He must have brought me here," he murmured.Although Dick did not know it, he had been at the bottom of the
hollow all evening and all night.The sun was now up once more,
but it was a day later than he imagined.The hollow was damp and full of ants and other insects, and as
soon as he felt able the youth got up.There was a big lump
behind his left ear where the stick had descended, and this hurt
not a little."I'll get square with him some day," he muttered, as he tried to
crawl out of the hollow."He has more courage to play the villain
than I gave him credit for.Sometime I'll face him again, and
then things will be different."It was no easy matter to get out of the hollow.The sides were
steep and slippery, and four times poor Dick tried, only to slip
back to the bottom.He was about to try a fifth time, when a
sound broke upon his ears which caused him great alarm.From only
a short distance away came the muffled roar of a lion.Dick had never heard, this sound out in the open before, but he
had heard it a number of times at the circus and at the menagerie
in Central Park, New York, and he recognized the roar only too
well.I trust he isn't coming this
way!"But he was coming that way, as Dick soon discovered.A few
seconds of silence were followed by another roar which to, the
alarmed youth appeared to come from almost over his head.Then
came a low whine, which was kept up for fully a minute, followed
by another roar.Dick hardly knew what was best--to remain at
the bottom of the hollow or try to escape to some tree at the top
of the opening."If I go up now he may nab me on sight," he
thought dismally."Oh, if only I had my--thank Heaven, I have!"Dick had felt for his pistol before, to find it gone.But now he
spotted the glint of the shiny barrel among the leaves.The
weapon had fallen from his person at the time Crabtree had pitched
him into the hollow.He reached for it, and to his joy found that
it was fully loaded and ready for use.Presently he heard the bushes overhead thrust aside, and then came
a half roar, half whine that made him jump.Looking up, he saw a
lion standing on the edge of the hollow facing him.The monarch of the forest was holding one of his forepaws up and
now he sat down on his haunches to lick the limb.Then he set up
another whine and shook the limb painfully."He has hurt that paw," thought Dick.Yes, he did see, just at that instant, and started back in
astonishment.Then his face took on a fierce look and he gave a
roar which could be heard for miles around.It was the report of Dick's pistol, but the youth was
nervous, and the bullet merely glanced along the lion's body,
doing little or no damage.The beast roared again, then crouched
down and prepared to leap upon the youth.But the wounded forepaw was a hindrance to the lion's movements,
and he began to crawl along the hollow's edge, seeking a better
point from which to make a leap.Then Dick's pistol spoke up a second time.This shot was a far better one, and the bullet passed directly
through the knee-joint of the lion's left forepaw.He was now
wounded in both fore limbs, and set up a roar which seemed to
fairly make the jungle tremble.Twice he started to leap down
into the hollow, but each time retreated to shake one wounded limb
after another into the air with whines of pain and distress.As soon as the great beast reappeared once more Dick continued his
firing.Soon his pistol was empty, but the lion had not been hit
again.In nervous haste the lad started to re-load only to find
that his cartridge box was empty.he yelled at the lion, and threw a stone at the beast.But the lion was now determined to descend into the hollow, and
paused only to calculate a sure leap to the boy's head.But that pause, brief as it was, was fatal to the calculations of
the monarch of the jungle.From his rear came two shots in rapid
succession, each hitting him in a vulnerable portion of his body.He leaped up into the air, rolled over on the edge of the hollow,
and then came down, head first, just grazing Dick's arm, and
landing at the boy's feet, stone dead."And so did I," came from Randolph Rover.cried Dick, with all the strength he could
command.He was shaking like a reed in the wind and all of the
color had deserted his face."I told you that I had heard several
pistol shots."Rover presented themselves at the top of the
hollow, followed by Aleck and Cujo.The latter procured a rope
made of twisted vines, and by this Dick was raised up without much
difficulty.CHAPTER XXVI

THE LAST OF JOSIAH CRABTREE


All listened intently to the story Dick had to tell, and he had
not yet finished when Dick Chester presented himself, having been
attracted to the vicinity by the roars of the lion and the various
pistol and gun shots."This Crabtree must certainly be as bad as you represent," he
said."I will have a talk with him when I get back to our camp.""It won't be necessary for you to talk to him," answered Dick
grimly."If you'll allow me, I'll do the talking."Chester and Cujo descended into the hollow to examine the lion.There was a bullet in his right foreleg which Chester proved had
come from his rifle."He must be the beast Frank Rand and I fired
at from across the lake.Probably he had his home in the hollow
and limped over to it during the night.""In that case you are entitled to your fair share of the meat--if
you wish any," said Randolph Rover with a smile."But I think
the pelt goes to Tom, for he fired the shot that was really
fatal."And that skin did go to Tom, and lies on his parlor floor
at home today."Several of the students from Yale had been out on a long tour the
afternoon before, in the direction, of the mountain, and they had
reported meeting several natives who had seen King Susko.He was
reported to have but half a dozen of his tribe with him, including
a fellow known as Poison Eye."That's a bad enough title for anybody," said Sam with a shudder."I suppose his job is to poison their enemies if they can't
overcome them in regular battle.""Um tell de thruf," put in Cujo."Once de Mimi tribe fight King
Susko, and whip him.Den Susko send Poison Eye to de Mimi camp.Next day all drink-water get bad, an' men, women, an' children die
off like um flies.""And why didn't they slay the poisoner?""Eberybody 'fraid to touch him--'fraid he be poisoned.""I'd run my chances--providing I had a knife or a club,"
muttered Tom."Such rascals are not fit to live."Dick, as can readily be imagined, was hungry, and before the party
started back for the lake, the youth was provided with some food
which Aleck had very thoughtfully carried with him.It was learned that the two parties were encamped not far apart,
and Dick Chester said he would bring his friends to, see them
before the noon hour was passed."I don't believe he will bring Josiah Crabtree," said Tom."I
reckon Crabtree will take good care to keep out of sight."When Chester came over with his friends he said
that the former teacher of Putnam Hall was missing, having left
word that he was going around the lake to look for a certain
species of flower which so far they had been unable to add to
their specimens."But he will have to come back," said the Vale student."He has
no outfit with which to go it alone."Crabtree put in an appearance just before the sun
set over the jungle to the westward.He presented a most woebegone
appearance, having fallen into a muddy swamp on his face."I--I met with an--an unfortunate accident," he said to
Chester."I fell into the--ahem--mud, and it was only with
great difficulty that I managed to--er--to extricate myself.""Josiah Crabtree, you didn't expect to see me here, did you?"said
Dick sternly, as he stepped forward.And then the others of his
party also came out from where they had been hiding in the brush.The former teacher of Putnam Hall started as if confronted by a
ghost."Why--er--where did you come from, Rover?""You know well enough where I came from, Josiah Crabtree," cried
Dick wrathfully."You dropped me into the hollow for dead, didn't
you!""Why, I--er--that--is--" stammered Crabtree; but could
actually go no further."Don't waste words on him, Dick," put in Tom."Give him the
thrashing he deserves.""If we were in America I would
have you locked up.But out here we must take the law into our
own hands.I am going to thrash you to the very best of my
ability, and after that, if I meet you again I'll--I'll--"

"Dun shoot him on sight," suggested Aleck."Chester--Rand--will you not aid me against this--er--savage
young brute?""Don't you call Dick a brute," put in Sam."If there is any brute here it is you, and everyone in our party
will back up what I say."Crabtree, I have nothing to say in this matter," said Dick
Chester."It would seem that your attack on Rover was a most
atrocious one, and out here you will have to take what punishment
comes.""But you will help me, won't you, Rand?"pleaded the former
teacher, nervously."No, I shall stand by Chester," answered Rand."And will you, too, see me humiliated?"asked Crabtree, turning to
the other Yale students."I, the head of your expedition into
equatorial Africa!"Crabtree, we may as well come to an understanding," said one
of the students, a heavyset young man named Sanders."We hired
you to do certain work for us, and we paid you well for that work.Since we left America you have found fault with nearly everything,
and in a good many instances which I need not recall just now you
have not done as you agreed.You are not the learned scientist
you represented yourself to be--instead, if we are to believe
our newly made friends here, you are a pretender, a big sham, and
a brute in the bargain.This being so, we intend to dispense with
your services from this day forth.We will pay you what is coming
to you, give you your share of our outfit, and then you can go
your way and we will go ours.We absolutely want nothing more to
do with you."This long speech on Sanders' part was delivered amid a deathlike
silence.As the student went on, Josiah Crabtree bit his lip
until the blood came.Once his baneful eyes fairly flashed fire
at Sanders and then at Dick Rover, but then they fell to the
ground."And so you--ahem--throw me off," he said, drawing a long
breath.But I demand all that is coming to me.""And a complete outfit, so that I can make my way back to the
coast.""All that is coming to you--no more and no less," said Sanders
firmly."But he shan't go without that thrashing!"cried Dick, and
catching up a long whip he had had Cujo cut for him he leaped upon
Josiah Crabtree and brought down the lash with stinging effect
across the former teacher's face, leaving a livid mark that
Crabtree was doomed to wear to the day of his death.And there is another for the way you treated Stanhope, and
another for what you did to Dora, and one for Tom, and another for
Sam, and another--"

"Oh!shrieked Crabtree, trying
to run away."Don't--I will be cut to pieces!And as the lash came down over his head, neck, and shoulders, he
danced madly around in pain.At last he broke for cover and
disappeared, not to show himself again until morning, when he
called Chester to him, asked for and received, what was coming to
him, and departed, vowing vengeance on the Rovers and all of the
others."He will remember you for that, Dick," said Sam, when the affair
was over."Let him be--I am not afraid of him," responded the elder
brother.CHAPTER XXVII

THE JOURNEY TO THE MOUNTAIN


By noon of the day following the Rover expedition was on its way
to the mountain said to be so rich in gold.The students from
Yale went with them."It's like a romance, this search after your father," said Chester
to Dick.You can rest assured that our
party will do all we can for you.Specimen hunting is all well
enough, but man hunting is far more interesting.""I would like to go on a regular hunt for big game some day," said
Tom.He had already mentioned Mortimer Blaze to the Yale
students."Yes, that's nice--if you are a crack shot, like Sanders.He
can knock the spots from a playing card at a hundred yards.""Maybe he's a Western boy," laughed Sam.His father owns a big cattle ranch there, and Sanders
learned to shoot while rounding up cattle.He's a tip-top
fellow."They had passed over a small plain and were now working along a
series of rough rocks overgrown with scrub brush and creeping
vines full of thorns.The thorns stuck everybody but Cujo, who
knew exactly how to avoid them."Ise dun got scratched in'steen thousand places," groaned Aleck."Dis am worse dan a bramble bush twice ober, by golly!"For two days the united expeditions kept on their way up the
mountain side,  which sloped gradually at its base, the steeper
portion still being several days' journey distant.During these days they shot several wild animals including a
beautiful antelope, while Sam caught a monkey.But the monkey bit
the boy in the shoulder, and Sam was glad enough to get rid of the
mischievous creature.On the afternoon of the second day Cujo, who was slightly in
advance of the others, called a halt."Two men ahead ob us, up um mountain," he said."Cujo Vink one of
dern King Susko."The discovery was talked over for a few minutes, and it was
decided that Cujo should go ahead, accompanied by Randolph Rover
and Dick.The others were to remain on guard for anything which
might turn up.Dick felt his heart beat rapidly as he advanced with his uncle and
the African guide through the tangle of thorns and over the rough
rocks.He felt that by getting closer to King Susko, he was also
getting closer to the mystery which surrounded his father's
disappearance."See, da is gwine up
into a big hole in de side ob de mountain?""Can you make out if it is Susko or not?""Not fo' certain, Massah Dick.But him belong to de Burnwo tribe,
an' de udder man too.""If they are all alone it will be an easy matter to capture them,"
said Randolph Rover."All told, we are twelve to two.""Come on, and we'll soon know something worth knowing, I feel
certain of it."Cujo now asked that he be allowed to proceed alone, to make
certain that no others of the Burnwo tribe were in the vicinity."We must be werry careful," he said."Burnwos kill eberybody wot
da find around here if not dare people.""Evidently they want to keep the whole mountain of gold to
themselves," observed Dick."All right, Cujo, do as you think
best--I know we can rely upon you."After this they proceeded with more care than ever-along a rocky
edge covered with loose stones.To one side was the mountain, to
the other a sheer descent of several hundred feet, and the
footpath was not over a yard wide."A tumble here would be a serious matter," said Randolph Rover."Take good care, Dick, that you don't step on a rolling stone."But the ledge was passed in safety, and in fifteen minutes more
they were close to the opening is the side of the mountain.It
was an irregular hole about ten feet wide and twice as high.The
a rocks overhead stuck out for several yards, and from these hung
numerous vines, forming a sort of Japanese curtain over the
opening.While the two Rovers waited behind a convenient rock, Cujo crawled
forward on his hand and knees into the cave.They waited for ten
minutes, just then it seemed an hour, but he did not reappear."He is taking his time," whispered Dick."Perhaps something has happened to him," returned Randolph Rover."I've had my pistol ready all along," answered the boy, exhibiting
the weapon."That encounter with the lion taught me a lesson.Dick broke off short, for a sound on the rocks above the cave
entrance had reached his ears.Both gazed in the direction, but
could see nothing."I heard a rustling in the bushes up there perhaps, though, it was
only a bird or some small animal.""Neither can I; but I am certain--Out of sight, Uncle Randolph,
quick!"Dick caught his uncle by the arm, and both threw themselves flat
behind the rocks.Scarcely had they gone down than two spears
came whizzing forward, one hitting the rocks and the other sailing
over their heads and burying itself in a tree trunk several yards
away.They caught a glance of two natives on the rocks over them,
but with the launching of the spears the Africans disappeared.CHAPTER XXVIII

KING SUSKO


"My gracious, this is getting at close range!"burst out Dick,
when he could catch his breath again."Uncle Randolph, they meant
to kill us!"Take care that they do not spear
you."No reply came back to this call, which was several times repeated.Then came a crash, as a big stone was hurled down, to split into a
score of pieces on the rock which sheltered them."They mean to dislodge us," said Dick."If they would only show
themselves--"

He stopped, for he had seen one of the Bumwos peering over a mass
of short brush directly over the cave entrance.Taking hasty aim
with his pistol be fired.A yell of pain followed, proving that the African had been hit.But the Bumwo was not seriously wounded, and soon he sent another
stone at them, this time hitting Randolph Rover on the leg.gasped Dick's uncle, and drew up that member with a wry
face."Did he hurt you much, Uncle Randolph?"And now the man
fired, but the bullet flew wide of its mark, for Randolph Rover
had practiced but little with firearms.They now thought it time to retreat, and, watching their chance,
they ran from the rocks to the trees beyond.While they were
exposed another spear was sent after them, cutting its way through
Mr.Rover's hat brim and causing that gentleman to turn as pale as
a sheet."A few inches closer and it would have been my head!"Perhaps we
had better rejoin the others, Dick."The shots had alarmed the others of the expedition, and all were
hurrying along the rocky ledge when Randolph Rover and Dick met
them."If you go ahead
we may be caught in an ambush.The Bumwos have discovered our
presence and mean to kill us if they can!"Suddenly a loud, deep voice broke upon them, coming from the rocks
over the cave entrance."This
country belongs to the Bumwos."I am King Susko, chief of the Bumwos.""Will you come and have a talk with us?"Want the white man to leave," answered the
African chief, talking in fairly good English."We do not wish to quarrel with you, King Susko; but you will find
it best for you if you will grant us an interview," went on
Randolph Rover."The white man must go away from this mountain.I will not talk
with him," replied the African angrily."To rob the Bumwos of their gold.""No; we are looking for a lost man, one who came to this country
years ago and one who was your prisoner--"

"The white man is no longer here--he went home long time ago.""You have him a prisoner, and
unless you deliver him up you shall suffer dearly for it."This threat evidently angered the African chief greatly, for
suddenly a spear was launched at the boy, which pierced Tom's
shoulder.As Tom went down, a shout went up from the rocks, and suddenly a
dozen or more Bumwos appeared, shaking their spears and acting as
if they meant to rush down on the party below without further
warning.CHAPTER XXIX

THE VILLAGE ON THE MOUNTAIN


"Tom is wounded!"He ran to his brother, to find the
blood flowing freely over Tom's shoulder."I--I guess not," answered Tom with a gasp of pain.Then, as
full of pluck as usual, Tom raised his pistol and fired, hitting
one of the Bumwos in the breast and sending him to the rear,
seriously wounded.It was evident that Cujo had been mistaken and that there were far
more of their enemies around the mountain than they had
anticipated.From behind the Rover expedition a cry arose,
telling that more of the natives were coming from that direction."We are being hemmed in," said Dick Chester nervously."No, let us make a stand," came from Rand."I think a concerted
volley from our pistols and guns will check their movements."It was decided to await the closer approach of the Bumwos, and
each of the party improved the next minute in seeing to it that
his weapon was ready for use.Suddenly a blood-curdling yell arose on the sultry air, and the
Bumwos were seen to be approaching from two directions, at right
angles to each other.cried Dick Rover, and began to fire at one
of the approaching forces.The fight that followed was, however, short and full of
consternation to the Africans.One of the parties was led by King
Susko himself, and the chief had covered less than half the
distance to where the Americans stood when a bullet from Tom
Rover's pistol reached him, wounding him in the thigh and causing
him to pitch headlong on the grass.The fall of the leader made the Africans set up a howl of dismay,
and instead of keeping up the fight they gathered around their
leader.Then, as the Americans continued to fire, they picked
King Susko up and ran off with him.A few spears were hurled at
our friends, but the whole battle, to use Sam's way of summing up
afterward, was a regular "two-for-a-cent affair."Soon the Bumwos
were out of sight down the mountain side.The first work of our friends after they had made certain that the
Africans had really retreated, was to attend to Tom's wound and
the bruise Randolph Rover had received from the stone.Fortunately
neither man nor boy was seriously hurt, although Tom carries the
mark of the spear's thrust to this day."But I don't care," said Tom."I hit old King Susko, and that was
worth a good deal, for it stopped the battle.If the fight had
kept on there is no telling how many of us might have been
killed."While the party was deliberating about what to do next, Cujo
reappeared."I go deep into de cabe when foah Bumwos come on me from behind,"
he explained."Da fight an' fight an' knock me down an' tie me wid vines, an'
den run away.But I broke loose from de vines an' cum just as
quick as could run.Werry big cabe dat, an' strange waterfall in
de back.""Let us explore the cave," said Dick."Somebody can remain on
guard outside."Some demurred to this, but the Rover boys could, not be held back,
and on they went, with Aleck with them.Soon Randolph Rover
hobbled after them, leaving Cujo and the college students to
remain on the watch.The cave proved to be a large affair, running all of half a mile
under the mountain.There were numerous holes in the roof,
through which the sun shone down, making the use of torches
unnecessary.To one side was a deep and swiftly flowing stream,
coming from the waterfall Cujo had mentioned, and disappearing
under the rocks near the entrance to the cavern.shouted Dick, as he gazed on the walls of the
cave."You are, Dick; this is a regular cave of gold, and no mistake.No wonder King Susko wanted to keep us away!"It was a fascinating scene to
watch the sparkling sheet as it thundered downward a distance of
fully a hundred feet.At the bottom was a pool where the water
was lashed into a milky foam which went swirling round and round.suddenly cried Sam, and pointed into
the falling water."Oh, Uncle Randolph, did you ever see anything
like it?""There are no such things as ghosts, Sam," replied his uncle."Stand here and look," answered Sam, and his uncle did as
requested.Presently from out of the mist came the form of a man--the
likeness of Randolph Rover himself!"It is nothing but an optical illusion, Sam, such as are produced
by some magicians on the theater stage.The sun comes down
through yonder hole and reflects your image on the wet rock, which
in turn reflects the form on the sheet of water."And that must be the ghost the natives believe in,"
answered Sam.I can tell you I was
startled.""Here is a path leading up past the waterfall," said Dick, who had
been making an investigation."Take care of where you go," warned Randolph Rover."There may be
some nasty pitfall there.""I'll keep my eyes open," responded Dick.He ascended the rocks, followed by Sam, while the others brought
up in the rear.Up over the waterfall was another cave, long and
narrow.There was now but little light from overhead, but far in
the distance could be seen a long, narrow opening, as if the
mountain top had been, by some convulsion of nature, split in
half."We are coming into the outer world again!"For beyond the opening was a small plain, covered with short grass
and surrounded on every side by jagged rocks which arose to the
height of fifty or sixty feet.In the center of the plain were a
number of native huts, of logs thatched with palm.CHAPTER XXX

FINDING THE LONG-LOST


"A village!""There are several women and children," returned Tom, pointing to
one of the huts."I guess the men went away to fight us."Let us investigate, but with
caution."As they advanced, the women and children set up a cry of alarm,
which was quickly taken up in several of the other huts."Go away, white men; don't touch us!"cried a voice in the purest
English.came from the three Rover boys, and they rushed off in
all haste toward the nut from which the welcome cry had proceeded.Anderson Rover was found in the center of the hut, bound fast by a
heavy iron chain to a post set deeply into the ground.His face
was haggard and thin and his beard was all of a foot and a half
long, while his hair fell thickly over his shoulders.He was
dressed in the merest rags, and had evidently suffered much from
starvation and from other cruel treatment."Do I see aright, or
is it only another of those wild dreams that have entered my brain
lately?"burst out Dick, and hugged his parent
around the neck."It's no dream, father; we are really here," put in Tom, as he
caught one of the slender hands, while Sam caught the other.And then he added tenderly: "But
we'll take good care of you, now we have found you."murmured Anderson Rover, as the brother came up.and the tears began to
flow down his cheeks.Many a time I
thought to give up in despair!""We came as soon as we got that message you sent," answered Dick."But that was long after you had sent it.""And is the sailor, Converse, safe?""Too bad--he was the one friend I had here.""And King Susko has kept you a prisoner all this while?""Yes; and he has treated me shamefully in the bargain.He
imagined I knew all of the secrets of this mountain, of a gold
mine of great riches, and he would not let me go; but, instead,
tried to wring the supposed secret from me by torture.""We will settle accounts with him some day," muttered Dick."It's
a pity Tom didn't kill him."The native women and children were looking in at the doorway
curiously, not knowing what to say or do.Turning swiftly, Dick
caught one by the arm."The key to the lock," he demanded, pointing to the lock on the
iron chain which bound Anderson Rover.But the woman shook her head, and pointed off in the distance."King Susko has the key," explained Anderson Rover."You will
have to break the chain,"  And this was at last done, although not
without great difficulty.In the meantime the natives were ordered to prepare a meal for
Anderson Rover and all of the others, and Cujo was called that he
might question the Africans in their own language.The meal was soon forthcoming, the Bumwo women fearing that they
would be slaughtered if they did not comply with the demands of
the whites.To make sure that the food had not been poisoned,
Dick made several of the natives eat portions of each dish."Um know a good deal," he remarked."Cujo was goin' to tell Dick to do dat.""I am glad the women and children are here," said Randolph Rover."We can take them with us when we leave and warn King Susko that
if he attacks us we will kill them.I think he will rather let us
go than see all of the women and children slaughtered."While they ate, Anderson Rover told his story, which is far too
long to insert here.He had found a gold mine further up the
country and also this mountain of gold, but had been unable to do
anything since King Susko had made him and the sailor prisoners.During his captivity he had suffered untold cruelties, but all
this was now forgotten in the joy of the reunion with his brother
and his three sons.It was decided that the party should leave the mountain without
delay, and Cujo told the female natives to get ready to move.At
this they set up a loud protest, but it availed them nothing, and
they soon quieted down when assured that no harm would befall them
if they behaved.CHAPTER XXXI

HOME AGAIN--CONCLUSION


Nightfall found the entire expedition, including the women and
children, on the mountain side below the caves.As the party went
down the mountain a strict watch was kept for the Bumwo warriors,
and just as the sun was setting, they were discovered in camp on
the trail to the northwest."We will send out a flag of truce," said Randolph Rover.This was done, and presently a tall Bumwo under chief came out in
a plain to hold a mujobo, or "law talk."In a few words Cujo explained the situation, stating that they now
held in bondage eighteen women and children, including King
Susko's favorite wife Afgona.If the whites were allowed to pass
through the country unharmed until they, reached the village of
Kwa, where the Kassai River joins the Congo, they would release
all of the women and children at that point and they could go back
to rejoin their husbands and fathers.If, on the other hand, the
expedition was attacked the whites would put all of those in
bondage to instant death.It is not likely that this horrible threat would have been put
into execution.As Dick said when relating the particulars of the
affair afterward."We couldn't have done such a terrible thing,
for it would not have been human."But the threat had the desired
effect, and in the morning King Susko, who was now on a sick bed,
sent word that they should go through unmolested.And go through they did, through jungles and over plains, across
rivers and lakes and treacherous swamps, watching continually for
their enemies, and bringing down many a savage beast that showed
itself.On the return they fell in with Mortimer Blaze, and he,
being a crack shot, added much to the strength of their command.At last Kwa was reached, and here they found themselves under the
protection of several European military organizations.The native
women and children were released, much to their joy, and my
readers can rest assured that these Africans lost no time in
getting back to that portion of the Dark Continent which they
called home.From Kwa to Boma the journey was comparatively easy.At Stanley
Pool they rested for a week, and all in the party felt the better
for it."Some day I will go back and open up the mines I have discovered,"
said Anderson Rover.I want to see my own dear
native land first."Josiah Crabtree had turned up and been
joined by Dan Baxter, and both had left for parts unknown."I hope we never see them again," said Dick, and his brothers said
the same.An American ship was in port, bound for Baltimore, and all of our
party, including the Yale students, succeeded in obtaining passage
on her for home.The trip was a most delightful one, and no days
could have been happier than those which the Rover boys spent
grouped around their lather listening to all he had to tell of the
numerous adventures which had befallen him since he had left home.A long letter was written to Captain Townsend, telling of the
finding of Anderson Rover, and the master of the Rosabel was,
later on, sent a gift of one hundred dollars for his goodness to
the Rovers.Of course Anderson Rover was greatly interested in what his sons
had been doing and was glad to learn that they were progressing so
finely at Putnam Hall."We will let Arnold Baxter drop," he said."He is our enemy, I know; but just now we will let the law take
its course for the rascality he practiced in Albany.""We can afford to let him
drop, seeing how well things have terminated for ourselves.""And how happy we are going to be," chimed in Sam."And how rich--when father settles up that mining claim in the
West," put in Tom.Here I must bring to a finish the story of the Rover boys'
adventures in the jungles of Africa.They had started out to find
their father, and they had found him, and for the time being all
went well.The home-coming of the Rovers was the occasion of a regular
celebration at Valley Brook farm.The neighbors came in from far
and wide and with them several people from the city who in former
years had known Anderson Rover well.It was a time never to be forgotten, and the celebration was kept
up for several days.Captain Putnam was there, and with him came
Frank, Fred, Larry, and several others.The captain apologized
handsomely to Aleck for the way he had treated the <DW52> man."I wish I had been with you," said Fred."You Rover boys are
wonders for getting around."I think we'll go West next," answered Dick."Father wants to
look up his mining interests, you know.We are going to ask him
to take us along."They did go west, and what adventures they had
will be related in a new volume, entitled "The Rover Boys Out West;
or, The Search for a Lost Mine.""But we are coming back to Putnam Hall first," added Tom.I thought of it even in the heart of Africa!""And so did I," put in Sam."I'll tell you, fellows, it's good
enough to roam around, but, after all, there is no place like
home."And with this truthful remark from the youngest Rover, let us
close this volume, kind reader, hoping that all of us may meet
again in the next book of the series, to be entitled, "The Rover
Boys Out West; or, The Search for a Lost Mine."In this story all
of our friends will once more play important parts, and we will
learn what the Baxters, father and son, did toward wresting the
Rover Boys' valuable mining property from them.But for the time
being all went well, and so good-by.I have a more confirmed opinion, however, respecting the
decoration of curved surfaces.The majesty of a roof is never, I think,
so great, as when the eye can pass undisturbed over the course of all
its curvatures, and trace the dying of the shadows along its smooth and
sweeping vaults.And I would rather, myself, have a plain ridged Gothic
vault, with all its rough stones visible, to keep the sleet and wind out
of a cathedral aisle, than all the fanning and pendanting and foliation
that ever bewildered Tudor weight.But mosaic or fresco may of course be
used as far as we can afford or obtain them; for these do not break the
curvature.Perhaps the most solemn roofs in the world are the apse
conchas of the Romanesque basilicas, with their golden ground and severe
figures.Exactly opposed to these are the decorations which disturb the
serenity of the curve without giving it interest, like the vulgar
panelling of St.Peter's and the Pantheon; both, I think, in the last
degree detestable.V. As roofs internally may be divided into surfaces and ribs,
externally they may be divided into surfaces, and points, or ridges;
these latter often receiving very bold and distinctive ornament.The
outside surface is of small importance in central Europe, being almost
universally low in <DW72>, and tiled throughout Spain, South France, and
North Italy: of still less importance where it is flat, as a terrace; as
often in South Italy and the East, mingled with low domes: but the
larger Eastern and Arabian domes become elaborate in ornamentation: I
cannot speak of them with confidence; to the mind of an inhabitant of
the north, a roof is a guard against wild weather; not a surface which
is forever to bask in serene heat, and gleam across deserts like a
rising moon.I can only say, that I have never seen any drawing of a
richly decorated Eastern dome that made me desire to see the original.tiles are used in some cases with quaint effect; but I believe the
dignity of the building is always greater when the roof is kept in an
undisturbed mass, opposing itself to the variegation and richness of the
walls.The Italian round tile is itself decoration enough, a deep and
rich fluting, which all artists delight in; this, however, is fitted
exclusively for low pitch of roofs.On steep domestic roofs, there is no
ornament better than may be obtained by merely rounding, or cutting to
an angle, the lower extremities of the flat tiles or shingles, as in
Switzerland: thus the whole surface is covered with an appearance of
scales, a fish-like defence against water, at once perfectly simple,
natural, and effective at any distance; and the best decoration of
sloping stone roofs, as of spires, is a mere copy of this scale armor;
it enriches every one of the spires and pinnacles of the cathedral of
Coutances, and of many Norman and early Gothic buildings.Roofs covered
or edged with lead have often patterns designed upon the lead, gilded
and relieved with some dark color, as on the house of Jaques Coeur at
Bourges; and I imagine the effect of this must have been singularly
delicate and beautiful, but only traces of it now remain.The northern
roofs, however, generally stand in little need of surface decoration,
the eye being drawn to the fantastic ranges of their dormer windows, and
to the finials and fringes on their points and ridges.Whether dormer windows are legitimately to be classed as
decorative features, seems to me to admit of doubt.The northern spire
system is evidently a mere elevation and exaggeration of the domestic
turret with its look-out windows, and one can hardly part with the
grotesque lines of the projections, though nobody is to be expected to
live in the spire: but, at all events, such windows are never to be
allowed in places visibly inaccessible, or on less than a natural and
serviceable scale.Under the general head of roof-ridge and point decoration, we
may include, as above noted, the entire race of fringes, finials, and
crockets.As there is no use in any of these things, and as they are
visible additions and parasitical portions of the structure, more
caution is required in their use than in any other features of ornament,
and the architect and spectator must both be in felicitous humor before
they can be well designed or thoroughly enjoyed.They are generally
most admirable where the grotesque Northern spirit has most power; and I
think there is almost always a certain spirit of playfulness in them,
adverse to the grandest architectural effects, or at least to be kept in
severe subordination to the serener character of the prevalent lines.But as they are opposed to the seriousness of majesty on the one hand,
so they are to the weight of dulness on the other; and I know not any
features which make the contrast between continental domestic
architecture, and our own, more humiliatingly felt, or which give so
sudden a feeling of new life and delight, when we pass from the streets
of London to those of Abbeville or Rouen, as the quaint points and
pinnacles of the roof gables and turrets.The commonest and heaviest
roof may be redeemed by a spike at the end of it, if it is set on with
any spirit; but the foreign builders have (or had, at least) a peculiar
feeling in this, and gave animation to the whole roof by the fringe of
its back, and the spike on its forehead, so that all goes together, like
the dorsal fins and spines of a fish: but our spikes have a dull,
screwed on, look; a far-off relationship to the nuts of machinery; and
our roof fringes are sure to look like fenders, as if they were meant to
catch ashes out of the London smoke-clouds.Stone finials and crockets are, I think, to be considered in
architecture, what points and flashes of light are in the color of
painting, or of nature.There are some landscapes whose best character
is sparkling, and there is a possibility of repose in the midst of
brilliancy, or embracing it,--as on the fields of summer sea, or summer
land:

  "Calm, and deep peace, on this high wold,
   And on the dews that drench the furze,
   And on the silvery gossamers,
   _That twinkle into green and gold_."And there are colorists who can keep their quiet in the midst of a
jewellery of light; but, for the most part, it is better to avoid
breaking up either lines or masses by too many points, and to make the
few points used exceedingly precious.So the best crockets and finials
are set, like stars, along the lines, and at the points, which they
adorn, with considerable intervals between them, and exquisite delicacy
and fancy of sculpture in their own designs; if very small, they may
become more frequent, and describe lines by a chain of points; but their
whole value is lost if they are gathered into bunches or clustered into
tassels and knots; and an over-indulgence in them always marks lowness
of school.In Venice, the addition of the finial to the arch-head is the
first sign of degradation; all her best architecture is entirely without
either crockets or finials; and her ecclesiastical architecture may be
classed, with fearless accuracy, as better or worse, in proportion to
the diminution or expansion of the crocket.The absolutely perfect use
of the crocket is found, I think, in the tower of Giotto, and in some
other buildings of the Pisan school.In the North they generally err on
one side or other, and are either florid and huge, or mean in outline,
looking as if they had been pinched out of the stonework, as throughout
the entire cathedral of Amiens; and are besides connected with the
generally spotty system which has been spoken of under the head of
archivolt decoration.X. Employed, however, in moderation, they are among the most
delightful means of delicate expression; and the architect has more
liberty in their individual treatment than in any other feature of the
building.Separated entirely from the structural system, they are
subjected to no shadow of any other laws than those of grace and
chastity; and the fancy may range without rebuke, for materials of their
design, through the whole field of the visible or imaginable creation.The reader has decorated but little
for himself as yet; but I have not, at least, attempted to bias his
judgment.Of the simple forms of decoration which have been set before
him, he has always been left free to choose; and the stated restrictions
in the methods of applying them have been only those which followed on
the necessities of construction previously determined.These having been
now defined, I do indeed leave my reader free to build; and with what a
freedom!All the lovely forms of the universe set before him, whence to
choose, and all the lovely lines that bound their substance or guide
their motion; and of all these lines,--and there are myriads of myriads
in every bank of grass and every tuft of forest; and groups of them
divinely harmonized, in the bell of every flower, and in every several
member of bird and beast,--of all these lines, for the principal forms
of the most important members of architecture, I have used but Three!What, therefore, must be the infinity of the treasure in them all!There
is material enough in a single flower for the ornament of a score of
cathedrals, but suppose we were satisfied with less exhaustive
appliance, and built a score of cathedrals, each to illustrate a single
flower?that would be better than trying to invent new styles, I think.There is quite difference of style enough, between a violet and a
harebell, for all reasonable purposes.Perhaps, however, even more strange than the struggle of our
architects to invent new styles, is the way they commonly speak of this
treasure of natural infinity.Let us take our patience to us for an
instant, and hear one of them, not among the least intelligent:--

  "It is not true that all natural forms are beautiful.We may hardly
  be able to detect this in Nature herself; but when the forms are
  separated from the things, and exhibited alone (by sculpture or
  carving), we then see that they are not all fitted for ornamental
  purposes; and indeed that very few, perhaps none, are so fitted
  without correction.Yes, I say _correction_, for though it is the
  highest aim of every art to imitate nature, this is not to be done by
  imitating any natural form, but by _criticising_ and _correcting_
  it,--criticising it by Nature's rules gathered from all her works,
  but never completely carried out by her in any one work; correcting
  it, by rendering it more natural, _i.e._ more conformable to the
  general tendency of Nature, according to that noble maxim recorded of
  Raffaelle, 'that the artist's object was to make things not as Nature
  makes them, but as she WOULD make them;' as she ever tries to make
  them, but never succeeds, though her aim may be deduced from a
  comparison of her efforts; just as if a number of archers had aimed
  unsuccessfully at a mark upon a wall, and this mark were then
  removed, we could by the examination of their arrow marks point out
  the most probable position of the spot aimed at, with a certainty of
  being nearer to it than any of their shots.I had thought that, by this time, we had done with that stale,
second-hand, one-sided, and misunderstood saying of Raffaelle's; or that
at least, in these days of purer Christian light, men might have begun
to get some insight into the meaning of it: Raffaelle was a painter of
humanity, and assuredly there is something the matter with humanity, a
few _dovrebbe's_, more or less, wanting in it.We have most of us heard
of original sin, and may perhaps, in our modest moments, conjecture that
we are not quite what God, or nature, would have us to be.Raffaelle
_had_ something to mend in Humanity: I should have liked to have seen
him mending a daisy!--or a pease-blossom, or a moth, or a mustard seed,
or any other of God's slightest works.If he had accomplished that, one
might have found for him more respectable employment,--to set the stars
in better order, perhaps (they seem grievously scattered as they are,
and to be of all manner of shapes and sizes,--except the ideal shape,
and the proper size); or to give us a corrected view of the ocean; that,
at least, seems a very irregular and improveable thing; the very
fishermen do not know, this day, how far it will reach, driven up before
the west wind:--perhaps Some One else does, but that is not our
business.Let us go down and stand by the beach of it,--of the great
irregular sea, and count whether the thunder of it is not out of time.One,--two:--here comes a well-formed wave at last, trembling a little at
the top, but, on the whole, orderly.So, crash among the shingle, and up
as far as this grey pebble; now stand by and watch!Another:--Ah,
careless wave!why couldn't you have kept your crest on?it is all gone
away into spray, striking up against the cliffs there--I thought as
much--missed the mark by a couple of feet!Another:--How now, impatient
one!couldn't you have waited till your friend's reflux was done with,
instead of rolling yourself up with it in that unseemly manner?A fourth, and a goodly one at last.What think we of yonder
slow rise, and crystalline hollow, without a flaw?Steady, good wave;
not so fast; not so fast; where are you coming to?--By our architectural
word, this is too bad; two yards over the mark, and ever so much of you
in our face besides; and a wave which we had some hope of, behind there,
broken all to pieces out at sea, and laying a great white table-cloth of
foam all the way to the shore, as if the marine gods were to dine off
it!Alas, for these unhappy arrow shots of Nature; she will never hit
her mark with those unruly waves of hers, nor get one of them, into the
ideal shape, if we wait for a thousand years.Let us send for a Greek
architect to do it for her.He comes--the great Greek architect, with
measure and rule.Will he not also make the weight for the winds?and
weigh out the waters by measure?and make a decree for the rain, and a
way for the lightning of the thunder?He sets himself orderly to his
work, and behold!this is the mark of nature, and this is the thing into
which the great Greek architect improves the sea--

[Illustration]

[Greek: Thalatta, thalatta]: Was it this, then, that they wept to see
from the sacred mountain--those wearied ones?Yes, and were not also
the leaves, and the blades of grass; and, in a sort, as far as may be
without mark of sin, even the countenance of man?Or would it be
pleasanter and better to have us all alike, and numbered on our
foreheads, that we might be known one from the other?V. Is there, then, nothing to be done by man's art?Have we only to
copy, and again copy, for ever, the imagery of the universe?We
have work to do upon it; there is not any one of us so simple, nor so
feeble, but he has work to do upon it.But the work is not to improve,
but to explain.This infinite universe is unfathomable, inconceivable,
in its whole; every human creature must slowly spell out, and long
contemplate, such part of it as may be possible for him to reach; then
set forth what he has learned of it for those beneath him; extricating
it from infinity, as one gathers a violet out of grass; one does not
improve either violet or grass in gathering it, but one makes the flower
visible; and then the human being has to make its power upon his own
heart visible also, and to give it the honor of the good thoughts it has
raised up in him, and to write upon it the history of his own soul.And
sometimes he may be able to do more than this, and to set it in strange
lights, and display it in a thousand ways before unknown: ways specially
directed to necessary and noble purposes, for which he had to choose
instruments out of the wide armory of God.All this he may do: and in
this he is only doing what every Christian has to do with the written,
as well as the created word, "rightly _dividing_ the word of truth."Out
of the infinity of the written word, he has also to gather and set forth
things new and old, to choose them for the season and the work that are
before him, to explain and manifest them to others, with such
illustration and enforcement as may be in his power, and to crown them
with the history of what, by them, God has done for his soul.And, in
doing this, is he improving the Word of God?Just such difference as
there is between the sense in which a minister may be said to improve a
text, to the people's comfort, and the sense in which an atheist might
declare that he could improve the Book, which, if any man shall add
unto, there shall be added unto him the plagues that are written
therein; just such difference is there between that which, with respect
to Nature, man is, in his humbleness, called upon to do, and that which,
in his insolence, he imagines himself capable of doing.Have no fear, therefore, reader, in judging between nature and
art, so only that you love both.If you can love one only, then let it
be Nature; you are safe with her: but do not then attempt to judge the
art, to which you do not care to give thought, or time.But if you love
both, you may judge between them fearlessly; you may estimate the last,
by its making you remember the first, and giving you the same kind of
joy.If, in the square of the city, you can find a delight, finite,
indeed, but pure and intense, like that which you have in a valley among
the hills, then its art and architecture are right; but if, after fair
trial, you can find no delight in them, nor any instruction like that of
nature, I call on you fearlessly to condemn them.We are forced, for the sake of accumulating our power and knowledge, to
live in cities; but such advantage as we have in association with each
other is in great part counterbalanced by our loss of fellowship with
nature.We cannot all have our gardens now, nor our pleasant fields to
meditate in at eventide.Then the function of our architecture is, as
far as may be, to replace these; to tell us about nature; to possess us
with memories of her quietness; to be solemn and full of tenderness,
like her, and rich in portraitures of her; full of delicate imagery of
the flowers we can no more gather, and of the living creatures now far
away from us in their own solitude.If ever you felt or found this in a
London Street,--if ever it furnished you with one serious thought, or
one ray of true and gentle pleasure,--if there is in your heart a true
delight in its grim railings and dark casements, and wasteful finery of
shops, and feeble coxcombry of club-houses,--it is well: promote the
building of more like them.But if they never taught you anything, and
never made you happier as you passed beneath them, do not think they
have any mysterious goodness nor occult sublimity.Have done with the
wretched affectation, the futile barbarism, of pretending to enjoy: for,
as surely as you know that the meadow grass, meshed with fairy rings, is
better than the wood pavement, cut into hexagons; and as surely as you
know the fresh winds and sunshine of the upland are better than the
choke-damp of the vault, or the gas-light of the ball-room, you may
know, as I told you that you should, that the good architecture, which
has life, and truth, and joy in it, is better than the bad architecture,
which has death, dishonesty, and vexation of heart in it, from the
beginning to the end of time.And now come with me, for I have kept you too long from your
gondola: come with me, on an autumnal morning, through the dark gates of
Padua, and let us take the broad road leading towards the East.It lies level, for a league or two, between its elms, and vine festoons
full laden, their thin leaves veined into scarlet hectic, and their
clusters deepened into gloomy blue; then mounts an embankment above the
Brenta, and runs between the river and the broad plain, which stretches
to the north in endless lines of mulberry and maize.The Brenta flows
slowly, but strongly; a muddy volume of yellowish-grey water, that
neither hastens nor slackens, but glides heavily between its monotonous
banks, with here and there a short, babbling eddy twisted for an instant
into its opaque surface, and vanishing, as if something had been dragged
into it and gone down.Dusty and shadeless, the road fares along the
<DW18> on its northern side; and the tall white tower of Dolo is seen
trembling in the heat mist far away, and never seems nearer than it did
at first.Presently you pass one of the much vaunted "villas on the
Brenta:" a glaring, spectral shell of brick and stucco, its windows with
painted architraves like picture-frames, and a court-yard paved with
pebbles in front of it, all burning in the thick glow of the feverish
sunshine, but fenced from the high road, for magnificence sake, with
goodly posts and chains; then another, of Kew Gothic, with Chinese
variations, painted red and green; a third composed for the greater
part of dead-wall, with fictitious windows painted upon it, each with a
pea-green blind, and a classical architrave in bad perspective; and a
fourth, with stucco figures set on the top of its garden-wall: some
antique, like the kind to be seen at the corner of the New Road, and
some of clumsy grotesque dwarfs, with fat bodies and large boots.This
is the architecture to which her studies of the Renaissance have
conducted modern Italy.The sun climbs steadily, and warms into intense white the walls
of the little piazza of Dolo, where we change horses.Another dreary
stage among the now divided branches of the Brenta, forming irregular
and half-stagnant canals; with one or two more villas on the other side
of them, but these of the old Venetian type, which we may have
recognised before at Padua, and sinking fast into utter ruin, black, and
rent, and lonely, set close to the edge of the dull water, with what
were once small gardens beside them, kneaded into mud, and with blighted
fragments of gnarled hedges and broken stakes for their fencing; and
here and there a few fragments of marble steps, which have once given
them graceful access from the water's edge, now settling into the mud in
broken joints, all aslope, and slippery with green weed.At last the
road turns sharply to the north, and there is an open space, covered
with bent grass, on the right of it: but do not look that way.Five minutes more, and we are in the upper room of the little
inn at Mestre, glad of a moment's rest in shade.The table is (always, I
think) covered with a cloth of nominal white and perennial grey, with
plates and glasses at due intervals, and small loaves of a peculiar
white bread, made with oil, and more like knots of flour than bread.The
view from its balcony is not cheerful: a narrow street, with a solitary
brick church and barren campanile on the other side of it; and some
coventual buildings, with a few crimson remnants of fresco about their
windows; and, between them and the street, a ditch with some slow
current in it, and one or two small houses beside it, one with an arbor
of roses at its door, as in an English tea-garden; the air, however,
about us having in it nothing of roses, but a close smell of garlic and
crabs, warmed by the smoke of various stands of hot chestnuts.There is
much vociferation also going on beneath the window respecting certain
wheelbarrows which are in rivalry for our baggage: we appease their
rivalry with our best patience, and follow them down the narrow street.X. We have but walked some two hundred yards when we come to a low
wharf or quay, at the extremity of a canal, with long steps on each side
down to the water, which latter we fancy for an instant has become black
with stagnation; another glance undeceives us,--it is covered with the
black boats of Venice.We enter one of them, rather to try if they be
real boats or not, than with any definite purpose, and glide away; at
first feeling as if the water were yielding continually beneath the boat
and letting her sink into soft vacancy.It is something clearer than any
water we have seen lately, and of a pale green; the banks only two or
three feet above it, of mud and rank grass, with here and there a
stunted tree; gliding swiftly past the small casement of the gondola, as
if they were dragged by upon a painted scene.Stroke by stroke we count the plunges of the oar, each heaving up the
side of the boat slightly as her silver beak shoots forward.We lose
patience, and extricate ourselves from the cushions: the sea air blows
keenly by, as we stand leaning on the roof of the floating cell.In
front, nothing to be seen but long canal and level bank; to the west,
the tower of Mestre is lowering fast, and behind it there have risen
purple shapes, of the color of dead rose-leaves, all round the horizon,
feebly defined against the afternoon sky,--the Alps of Bassano.Forward
still: the endless canal bends at last, and then breaks into intricate
angles about some low bastions, now torn to pieces and staggering in
ugly rents towards the water,--the bastions of the fort of Malghera.Another turn, and another perspective of canal; but not interminable.The silver beak cleaves it fast,--it widens: the rank grass of the
banks sinks lower, and lower, and at last dies in tawny knots along an
expanse of weedy shore.Over it, on the right, but a few years back, we
might have seen the lagoon stretching to the horizon, and the warm
southern sky bending over Malamocco to the sea.Now we can see nothing
but what seems a low and monotonous dock-yard wall, with flat arches to
let the tide through it;--this is the railroad bridge, conspicuous above
all things.But at the end of those dismal arches, there rises, out of
the wide water, a straggling line of low and confused brick buildings,
which, but for the many towers which are mingled among them, might be
the suburbs of an English manufacturing town.Four or five domes, pale,
and apparently at a greater distance, rise over the centre of the line;
but the object which first catches the eye is a sullen cloud of black
smoke brooding over the northern half of it, and which issues from the
belfry of a church.FOOTNOTES:

  [92] Garbett on Design, p.I find the chroniclers agree in fixing the year 421, if any: the
following sentence from De Monaci may perhaps interest the reader."God, who punishes the sins of men by war sorrows, and whose ways are
past finding out, willing both to save the innocent blood, and that a
great power, beneficial to the whole world, should arise in a spot
strange beyond belief, moved the chief men of the cities of the Venetian
province (which from the border of Pannonia, extended as far as the
Adda, a river of Lombardy), both in memory of past, and in dread of
future distress, to establish states upon the nearer islands of the
inner gulphs of the Adriatic, to which, in the last necessity, they
might retreat for refuge.And first Galienus de Fontana, Simon de
Glauconibus, and Antonius Calvus, or, as others have it, Adalburtus
Falerius, Thomas Candiano, Comes Daulus, Consuls of Padua, by the
command of their King and the desire of the citizens, laid the
foundations of the new commonwealth, under good auspices, on the island
of the Rialto, the highest and nearest to the mouth of the deep river
now called the Brenta, in the year of Our Lord, as many writers assure
us, four hundred and twenty-one, on the 25th day of March."[93]

It is matter also of very great satisfaction to know that Venice was
founded by good Christians: "La qual citade e stada hedificada da veri e
boni Christiani:" which information I found in the MS.copy of the
Zancarol Chronicle, in the library of St.Finally the conjecture as to the origin of her name, recorded by
Sansovino, will be accepted willingly by all who love Venice: "Fu
interpretato da alcuni, che questa voce VENETIA voglia dire _VENI
ETIAM_, cioe, vieni ancora, e ancora, percioche quante volte verrai,
sempre vedrai nuove cose, enuove bellezze."The best authorities agree in giving the year 697 as that of the
election of the first doge, Paul Luke Anafeste.He was elected in a
general meeting of the commonalty, tribunes, and clergy, at Heraclea,
"divinis rebus procuratis," as usual, in all serious work, in those
times.His authority is thus defined by Sabellico, who was not likely to
have exaggerated it:--"Penes quem decus omne imperii ac majestas esset:
cui jus concilium cogendi quoties de republica aliquid referri
oporteret; qui tribunos annuos in singulas insulas legeret, a quibus ad
Ducem esset provocatio.Caeterum, si quis dignitatem, ecclesiam,
sacerdotumve cleri populique suffragio esset adeptus, ita demum id ratum
haberetur si dux ipse auctor factus esset."The last clause is
very important, indicating the subjection of the ecclesiastical to the
popular and ducal (or patrician) powers, which, throughout her career,
was one of the most remarkable features in the policy of Venice.The
appeal from the tribunes to the doge is also important; and the
expression "decus omne imperii," if of somewhat doubtful force, is at
least as energetic as could have been expected from an historian under
the influence of the Council of Ten.The date of the decree which made the right of sitting in the grand
council hereditary, is variously given; the Venetian historians
themselves saying as little as they can about it.The thing was
evidently not accomplished at once, several decrees following in
successive years: the Council of Ten was established without any doubt
in 1310, in consequence of the conspiracy of Tiepolo.The Venetian
verse, quoted by Mutinelli (Annali Urbani di Venezia, p."Del mille tresento e diese
   A mezzo el mese delle ceriese
   Bagiamonte passo el ponte
   E per esso fo fatto el Consegio di diese."The reader cannot do better than take 1297 as the date of the beginning
of the change of government, and this will enable him exactly to divide
the 1100 years from the election of the first doge into 600 of monarchy
and 500 of aristocracy.The coincidence of the numbers is somewhat
curious; 697 the date of the establishment of the government, 1297 of
its change, and 1797 of its fall.S. PIETRO DI CASTELLO.It is credibly reported to have been founded in the seventh century, and
(with somewhat less of credibility) in a place where the Trojans,
conducted by Antenor, had, after the destruction of Troy, built "un
castello, chiamato prima Troja, poscia Olivolo, interpretato, luogo
pieno."Peter appeared in person to the Bishop of
Heraclea, and commanded him to found in his honor, a church in that spot
of the rising city on the Rialto: "ove avesse veduto una mandra di buoi
e di pecore pascolare unitamente.Questa fu la prodigiosa origine della
Chiesa di San Pietro, che poscia, o rinovata, o ristaurata, da Orso
Participazio IV Vescovo Olivolense, divenne la Cattedrale della Nuova
citta."(Notizie Storiche delle Chiese e Monasteri di Venezia.What there was so prodigious in oxen and sheep feeding together,
we need St.The title of Bishop of Castello
was first taken in 1091: St.Mark's was not made the cathedral church
till 1807.It may be thought hardly fair to conclude the small
importance of the old St.Pietro di Castello from the appearance of the
wretched modernisations of 1620.But these modernisations are spoken of
as improvements; and I find no notice of peculiar beauties in the older
building, either in the work above quoted, or by Sansovino; who only
says that when it was destroyed by fire (as everything in Venice was, I
think, about three times in a century), in the reign of Vital Michele,
it was rebuilt "with good thick walls, maintaining, _for all that_, the
order of its arrangement taken from the Greek mode of building."This
does not seem the description of a very enthusiastic effort to rebuild a
highly ornate cathedral.The present church is among the least
interesting in Venice; a wooden bridge, something like that of Battersea
on a small scale, connects its island, now almost deserted, with a
wretched suburb of the city behind the arsenal; and a blank level of
lifeless grass, rotted away in places rather than trodden, is extended
before its mildewed facade and solitary tower.I may refer the reader to the eleventh chapter of the twenty-eighth book
of Daru for some account of the restraints to which the Venetian clergy
were subjected.I have not myself been able to devote any time to the
examination of the original documents bearing on this matter, but the
following extract from a letter of a friend, who will not at present
permit me to give his name, but who is certainly better conversant
with the records of the Venetian State than any other Englishman, will
be of great value to the general reader:--

"In the year 1410, or perhaps at the close of the thirteenth century,
churchmen were excluded from the Grand Council and declared ineligible
to civil employment; and in the same year, 1410, the Council of Ten,
with the Giunta, decreed that whenever in the state's councils matters
concerning ecclesiastical affairs were being treated, all the kinsfolk
of Venetian beneficed clergymen were to be expelled; and, in the year
1434, the RELATIONS of churchmen were declared ineligible to the post of
ambassador at Rome."The Venetians never gave possession of any see in their territories to
bishops unless they had been proposed to the pope by the senate, which
elected the patriarch, who was supposed, at the end of the sixteenth
century, to be liable to examination by his Holiness, as an act of
confirmation of installation; but of course, everything depended on the
relative power at any given time of Rome and Venice: for instance, a few
days after the accession of Julius II., in 1503, he requests the
Signory, cap in hand, to ALLOW him to confer the archbishopric of Zara
on a dependant of his, one Cipico the Bishop of Famagosta.Six years
later, when Venice was overwhelmed by the leaguers of Cambrai, that
furious pope would assuredly have conferred Zara on Cipico WITHOUT
asking leave.In 1608, the rich Camaldolite Abbey of Vangadizza, in the
Polesine, fell vacant through the death of Lionardo Loredano, in whose
family it had been since some while.The Venetian ambassador at Rome
received the news on the night of the 28th December; and, on the morrow,
requested Paul IV.not to dispose of this preferment until he heard from
the senate.The pope talked of 'poor cardinals' and of his nephew, but
made no positive reply; and, as Francesco Contarini was withdrawing,
said to him: 'My Lord ambassador, with this opportunity we will inform
you that, to our very great regret, we understand that the chiefs of the
Ten mean to turn sacristans; for they order the parish priests to close
the church doors at the Ave Maria, and not to ring the bells at certain
hours.This is precisely the sacristan's office; we don't know why their
lordships, by printed edicts, which we have seen, choose to interfere in
this matter.This is pure and mere ecclesiastical jurisdiction; and
even, in case of any inconvenience arising, is there not the patriarch,
who is at any rate your own; why not apply to him, who could remedy
these irregularities?These are matters which cause us very notable
displeasure; we say so that they may be written and known: it is decided
by the councils and canons, and not uttered by us, that whosoever forms
any resolve against the ecclesiastical liberty, cannot do so without
incurring censure: and in order that Father Paul [Bacon's correspondent]
may not say hereafter, as he did in his past writings, that our
predecessors assented either tacitly or by permission, we declare that
we do not give our assent, nor do we approve it; nay, we blame it, and
let this be announced in Venice, so that, for the rest, every one may
take care of his own conscience.Thomas a Becket, whose festival is
celebrated this very day, suffered martyrdom for the ecclesiastical
liberty; it is our duty likewise to support and defend it.'Contarini
says: 'This remonstrance was delivered with some marks of anger, which
induced me to tell him how the tribunal of the most excellent the Lords
chiefs of the Ten is in our country supreme; that it does not do its
business unadvisedly, or condescend to unworthy matters; and that,
therefore, should those Lords have come to any public declaration of
their will, it must be attributed to orders anterior, and to immemorial
custom and authority, recollecting that, on former occasions likewise,
similar commissions were given to prevent divers incongruities;
wherefore an upright intention, such as this, ought not to be taken in
any other sense than its own, especially as the parishes of Venice were
in her own gift,' &c.&c. The pope persisted in bestowing the abbacy on
his nephew, but the republic would not give possession, and a compromise
was effected by its being conferred on the Venetian Matteo Priuli, who
allowed the cardinal five thousand ducats per annum out of its revenues.A few years before this, this very same pope excommunicated the State,
because she had imprisoned two churchmen for heinous crimes; the strife
lasted for more than a year, and ended through the mediation of Henry
IV., at whose suit the prisoners were delivered to the French
ambassador, who made them over to a papal commissioner."In January, 1484, a tournament was in preparation on St.Mark's Square:
some murmurs had been heard about the distribution of the prizes having
been pre-arranged, without regard to the 'best man.'One of the chiefs
of the Ten was walking along Rialto on the 28th January, when a young
priest, twenty-two years old, a sword-cutlers son, and a Bolognese, and
one of Perugia, both men-at-arms under Robert Sansoverino, fell upon a
clothier with drawn weapons.The chief of the Ten desired they might be
seized, but at the moment the priest escaped; he was, however,
subsequently retaken, and in that very evening hanged by torch-light
between the columns with the two soldiers.; Venice weaker in 1605 than in 1484."* * * The exclusion from the Grand Council, whether at the end of the
fourteenth or commencement of the following century, of the Venetian
ecclesiastics, (as induced either by the republic's acquisitions on the
main land then made, and which, through the rich benefices they
embraced, might have rendered an ambitious churchman as dangerous in the
Grand Council as a victorious condottiere; or from dread of their
allegiance being divided between the church and their country, it being
acknowledged that no man can serve two masters,) did not render them
hostile to their fatherland, whose interests were, with very few
exceptions, eagerly fathered by the Venetian prelates at Rome, who, in
their turn, received all honor at Venice, where state receptions given
to cardinals of the houses of Correr, Grimani, Cornaro, Pisani,
Contarini, Zeno, Delfino, and others, vouch for the good understanding
that existed between the 'Papalists' and their countrymen.The Cardinal
Grimani was instrumental in detaching Julius II.from the league of
Cambrai; the Cardinal Cornaro always aided the state to obtain anything
required of Leo X.; and, both before and after their times, all
Venetians that had a seat in the Sacred College were patriots rather
than pluralists: I mean that they cared more for Venice than for their
benefices, admitting thus the soundness of that policy which denied them
admission into the Grand Council."To this interesting statement, I shall add, from the twenty-eighth book
of Daru, two passages, well deserving consideration by us English in
present days:

"Pour etre parfaitement assuree contre les envahissements de la
puissance ecclesiastique, Venise commenca par lui oter tout pretexte
d'intervenir dans les affaires de l'Etat; elle resta invariablement
fidele au dogme.Jamais aucune des opinions nouvelles n'y prit la
moindre faveur; jamais aucun heresiarque ne sortit de Venise.Les
conciles, les disputes, les guerres de religion, se passerent sans
qu'elle y prit jamais la moindre part.Inebranlable dans sa foi, elle ne
fut pas moins invariable dans son systeme de tolerance.Non seulement
ses sujets de la religion grecque conserverent l'exercise de leur culte,
leurs eveques et leurs pretres; mais les Protestantes, les Armeniens,
les Mahomitans, les Juifs, toutes les religions, toutes les sectes qui
se trouvaient dans Venise, avaient des temples, et la sepulture dans les
eglises n'etait point refuse aux heretiques.Une police vigilante
s'appliquait avec le meme soin a eteindre les discordes, et a empecher
les fanatiques et les novateurs de troubler l'Etat."*       *       *       *       *

"Si on considere que c'est dans un temps ou presque toutes les nations
tremblaient devant la puissance pontificale, que les Venitiens surent
tenir leur clerge dans la dependance, et braver souvent les censures
ecclesiastiques et les interdits, sans encourir jamais aucun reproche
sur la purete de leur foi, on sera force de reconnaitre que cette
republique avait devance de loin les autres peuples dans cette partie de
la science du gouvernement.La fameuse maxime, 'Siamo veneziani, poi
christiani,' n'etait qu'une formule energique qui ne prouvait point
quils voulussent placer l'interet de la religion apres celui de l'Etat,
mais qui annoncait leur invariable resolution de ne pas souffrir qu'un
pouvoir etranger portat atteinte aux droits de la republique."Dans toute la duree de son existence, an milieu des revers comme dans
la prosperite cet inebranlable gouvernement ne fit qu'une seule fois des
concessions a la cour de Borne, et ce fut pour detacher le Pape Jules
II."Jamais il ne se relacha du soin de tenir le clerge dans une nullite
absolue relativement aux affaires politiques; on peut en juger par la
conduite qu'il tint avec l'ordre religieux le plus redoutable et le plus
accoutume a s'immiscer dans les secrets de l'Etat et dans les interets
temporels."The main points, next stated, respecting the Jesuits are, that the
decree which permitted their establishment in Venice required formal
renewal every three years; that no Jesuit could stay in Venice more than
three years; that the slightest disobedience to the authority of the
government was instantly punished by imprisonment; that no Venetian
could enter the order without express permission from the government;
that the notaries were forbidden to sanction any testamentary disposal
of property to the Jesuits; finally, that the heads of noble families
were forbidden to permit their children to be educated in the Jesuits'
colleges, on pain of degradation from their rank.Now, let it be observed that the enforcement of absolute exclusion of
the clergy from the councils of the state, dates exactly from the period
which I have marked for the commencement of the decline of the Venetian
power.The Romanist is welcome to his advantage in this fact, if
advantage it be; for I do not bring forward the conduct of the senate of
Venice, as Daru does, by way of an example of the general science of
government.The Venetians accomplished therein what we ridiculously call
a separation of "Church and State" (as if the State were not, in all
Christendom, necessarily also the Church[94]), but _ought_ to call a
separation of lay and clerical officers.I do not point out this
separation as subject of praise, but as the witness borne by the
Venetians against the principles of the Papacy.If they were to blame,
in yielding to their fear of the ambitious spirit of Rome so far as to
deprive their councils of all religious element, what excuse are we to
offer for the state, which, with Lords Spiritual of her own faith
already in her senate, permits the polity of Rome to be represented by
lay members?To have sacrificed religion to mistaken policy, or
purchased security with ignominy, would have been no new thing in the
world's history; but to be at once impious and impolitic, and seek for
danger through dishonor, was reserved for the English parliament of
1829.I am glad to have this opportunity of referring to, and farther
enforcing, the note on this subject which, not without deliberation, I
appended to the "Seven Lamps;" and of adding to it the following
passage, written by my father in the year 1839, and published in one of
the journals of that year:--a passage remarkable as much for its
intrinsic value, as for having stated, twelve years ago, truths to which
the mind of England seems but now, and that slowly, awakening."We hear it said, that it cannot be merely the Roman religion that
causes the difficulty [respecting Ireland], for we were once all Roman
Catholics, and nations abroad of this faith are not as the Irish.It is
totally overlooked, that when we were so, our government was despotic,
and fit to cope with this dangerous religion, as most of the Continental
governments yet are.In what Roman Catholic state, or in what age of
Roman Catholic England, did we ever hear of such agitation as now exists
in Ireland by evil men taking advantage of an anomalous state of
things--Roman Catholic ignorance in the people, Protestant toleration in
the government?We have yet to feel the tremendous difficulty in which
Roman Catholic emancipation has involved us.Too late we discover that a
Roman Catholic is wholly incapable of being safely connected with the
British constitution, as it now exists, _in any near relation_.The
present constitution is no longer fit for Catholics.It is a creature
essentially Protestant, growing with the growth, and strengthening with
the strength, of Protestantism.So entirely is Protestantism interwoven
with the whole frame of our constitution and laws, that I take my stand
on this, against all agitators in existence, that the Roman religion is
totally incompatible with the British constitution.We have, in trying
to combine them, got into a maze of difficulties; we are the worse, and
Ireland none the better.It is idle to talk of municipal reform or
popular Lords Lieutenant.The mild sway of a constitutional monarchy is
not strong enough for a Roman Catholic population.The stern soul of a
Republican would not shrink from sending half the misguided population
and all the priests into exile, and planting in their place an
industrious Protestant people.But you cannot do this, and you cannot
convert the Irish, nor by other means make them fit to wear the mild
restraints of a Protestant Government.It was, moreover, a strange logic
that begot the idea of admitting Catholics to administer any part of our
laws or constitution.It was admitted by all that, by the very act of
abandoning the Roman religion, we became a free and enlightened people.It was only by throwing off the yoke of that slavish religion that we
attained to the freedom of thought which has advanced us in the scale of
society.We are so much advanced by adopting and adhering to a reformed
religion, that to prove our liberal and unprejudiced views, we throw
down the barriers betwixt the two religions, of which the one is the
acknowledged cause of light and knowledge, the other the cause of
darkness and ignorance.We are so much altered to the better by leaving
this people entirely, and giving them neither part nor lot amongst us,
that it becomes proper to mingle again with them.We have found so much
good in leaving them, that we deem it the best possible reason for
returning to be among them.No fear of their Church again shaking us,
with all our light and knowledge.It is true, the most enlightened
nations fell under the spell of her enchantments, fell into total
darkness and superstition; but no fear of us--we are too well informed!I fear me, when the
Roman religion rolled her clouds of darkness over the earlier ages, that
she quenched as much light, and knowledge, and judgment as our modern
Liberals have ever displayed.I do not expect a statesman to discuss the
point of Transubstantiation betwixt Protestant and Catholic, nor to
trace the narrow lines which divide Protestant sectarians from each
other; but can any statesman that shall have taken even a cursory
glance at the face of Europe, hesitate a moment on the choice of the
Protestant religion?If he unfortunately knew nothing of its being the
true one in regard to our eternal interests, he is at least bound to see
whether it be not the best for the worldly prosperity of a people.He
may be but moderately imbued with pious zeal for the salvation of a
kingdom, but at least he will be expected to weigh the comparative
merits of religion, as of law or government; and blind, indeed, must he
be if he does not discern that, in neglecting to cherish the Protestant
faith, or in too easily yielding to any encroachments on it, he is
foregoing the use of a state engine more powerful than all the laws
which the uninspired legislators of the earth have ever promulgated, in
promoting the happiness, the peace, prosperity, and the order, the
industry, and the wealth, of a people; in forming every quality valuable
or desirable in a subject or a citizen; in sustaining the public mind at
that point of education and information that forms the best security for
the state, and the best preservative for the freedom of a people,
whether religious or political."There having been three principal styles of architecture in Venice,--the
Greek or Byzantine, the Gothic, and the Renaissance, it will be shown,
in the sequel, that the Renaissance itself is divided into three
correspondent families: Renaissance engrafted on Byzantine, which is
earliest and best; Renaissance engrafted on Gothic, which is second, and
second best; Renaissance on Renaissance, which is double darkness, and
worst of all.The palaces in which Renaissance is engrafted on Byzantine
are those noticed by Commynes: they are characterized by an
ornamentation very closely resembling, and in some cases identical with,
early Byzantine work; namely, groups of  marble circles inclosed
in interlacing bands.I have put on the opposite page one of these
ornaments, from the Ca' Trevisan, in which a most curious and delicate
piece of inlaid design is introduced into a band which is almost exactly
copied from the church of Theotocos at Constantinople, and correspondent
with others in St.There is also much Byzantine feeling in the
treatment of the animals, especially in the two birds of the lower
compartment, while the peculiar curves of the cinque cento leafage are
visible in the leaves above.The dove, alighted, with the olive-branch
plucked off, is opposed to the raven with restless expanded wings.Beneath are evidently the two sacrifices "of every clean fowl and of
every clean beast."The color is given with green and white marbles, the
dove relieved on a ground of greyish green, and all is exquisitely
finished.13, the upper figure is from the same palace (Ca'
Trevisan), and it is very interesting in its proportions.If we take
five circles in geometrical proportion, each diameter being two-thirds
of the diameter next above it, and arrange the circles so proportioned,
in contact with each other, in the manner shown in the plate, we shall
find that an increase quite imperceptible in the diameter of the circles
in the angles, will enable us to inscribe the whole in a square.The
lines so described will then run in the centre of the white bands.I
cannot be certain that this is the actual construction of the Trevisan
design, because it is on a high wall surface, where I could not get at
its measurements; but I found this construction exactly coincide with
the lines of my eye sketch.The lower figure in Plate I. is from the
front of the Ca' Dario, and probably struck the eye of Commynes in its
first brightness.Salvatico, indeed, considers both the Ca' Trevisan
(which once belonged to Bianca Cappello) and the Ca' Dario, as buildings
of the sixteenth century.I defer the discussion of the question at
present, but have, I believe, sufficient reason for assuming the Ca'
Dario to have been built about 1486, and the Ca' Trevisan not much
later.VARIETIES OF THE ORDERS.Of these phantasms and grotesques, one of some general importance is
that commonly called Ionic, of which the idea was taken (Vitruvius says)
from a woman's hair, curled; but its lateral processes look more like
rams' horns: be that as it may, it is a mere piece of agreeable
extravagance, and if, instead of rams' horns, you put ibex horns, or
cows' horns, or an ass's head at once, you will have ibex orders, or ass
orders, or any number of other orders, one for every head or horn.You
may have heard of another order, the Composite, which is Ionic and
Corinthian mixed, and is one of the worst of ten thousand forms
referable to the Corinthian as their head: it may be described as a
spoiled Corinthian.And you may have also heard of another order, called
Tuscan (which is no order at all, but a spoiled Doric): and of another
called Roman Doric, which is Doric more spoiled, both which are simply
among the most stupid variations ever invented upon forms already known.I find also in a French pamphlet upon architecture,[95] as applied to
shops and dwelling houses, a sixth order, the "Ordre Francais," at least
as good as any of the three last, and to be hailed with acclamation,
considering whence it comes, there being usually more tendency on the
other side of the channel to the confusion of "orders" than their
multiplication: but the reader will find in the end that there are in
very deed only two orders, of which the Greek, Doric, and Corinthian are
the first examples, and _they_ not perfect, nor in anywise sufficiently
representative of the vast families to which they belong; but being the
first and the best known, they may properly be considered as the types
of the rest.The essential distinctions of the two great orders he will
find explained in Secs.XXVII., and in the
passages there referred to; but I should rather desire that these
passages might be read in the order in which they occur.I have sketched above, in the First Chapter, the great events of
architectural history in the simplest and fewest words I could; but this
indraught of the Lombard energies upon the Byzantine rest, like a wild
north wind descending into a space of rarified atmosphere, and
encountered by an Arab simoom from the south, may well require from us
some farther attention; for the differences in all these schools are
more in the degrees of their impetuosity and refinement (these
qualities being, in most cases, in inverse ratio, yet much united by the
Arabs) than in the style of the ornaments they employ.The same leaves,
the same animals, the same arrangement, are used by Scandinavians,
ancient Britons, Saxons, Normans, Lombards, Romans, Byzantines, and
Arabians; all being alike descended through classic Greece from Egypt
and Assyria, and some from Phoenicia.The belts which encompass the
Assyrian bulls, in the hall of the British Museum, are the same as the
belts of the ornaments found in Scandinavian tumuli; their method of
ornamentation is the same as that of the gate of Mycenae, and of the
Lombard pulpit of St.Ambrogio of Milan, and of the church of Theotocos
at Constantinople; the essential differences among the great schools are
their differences of temper and treatment, and science of expression; it
is absurd to talk of Norman ornaments, and Lombard ornaments, and
Byzantine ornaments, as formally distinguished; but there is
irreconcileable separation between Arab temper, and Lombard temper, and
Byzantine temper.Now, as far as I have been able to compare the three schools, it appears
to me that the Arab and Lombard are both distinguished from the
Byzantine by their energy and love of excitement, but the Lombard stands
alone in his love of jest: Neither an Arab nor Byzantine ever jests in
his architecture; the Lombard has great difficulty in ever being
thoroughly serious; thus they represent three conditions of humanity,
one in perfect rest, the Byzantine, with exquisite perception of grace
and dignity; the Arab, with the same perception of grace, but with a
restless fever in his blood; the Lombard, equally energetic, but not
burning himself away, capable of submitting to law, and of enjoying
jest.But the Arabian feverishness infects even the Lombard in the
South, showing itself, however, in endless invention, with a refreshing
firmness and order directing the whole of it.The excitement is greatest
in the earliest times, most of all shown in St.Michele of Pavia; and I
am strongly disposed to connect much of its peculiar manifestations with
the Lombard's habits of eating and drinking, especially his
carnivorousness.The Lombard of early times seems to have been exactly
what a tiger would be, if you could give him love of a joke, vigorous
imagination, strong sense of justice, fear of hell, knowledge of
northern mythology, a stone den, and a mallet and chisel; fancy him
pacing up and down in the said den to digest his dinner, and striking on
the wall, with a new fancy in his head, at every turn, and you have the
Lombardic sculptor.As civilisation increases the supply of vegetables,
and shortens that of wild beasts, the excitement diminishes; it is still
strong in the thirteenth century at Lyons and Rouen; it dies away
gradually in the later Gothic, and is quite extinct in the fifteenth
century.I think I shall best illustrate this general idea by simply copying the
entries in my diary which were written when, after six months' close
study of Byzantine work in Venice, I came again to the Lombard work of
Verona and Pavia.There are some other points alluded to in these
entries not pertaining to the matter immediately in hand; but I have
left them, as they will be of use hereafter.Comparing the arabesque and sculpture of the Duomo here with
St.Mark's, the first thing that strikes one is the low relief, the
second, the greater motion and spirit, with infinitely less grace and
science.With the Byzantine, however rude the cutting, every line is
lovely, and the animals or men are placed in any attitudes which secure
ornamental effect, sometimes impossible ones, always severe, restrained,
or languid.With the Romanesque workmen all the figures show the effort
(often successful) to express energetic action; hunting chiefly, much
fighting, and both spirited; some of the dogs running capitally,
straining to it, and the knights hitting hard, while yet the faces and
drawing are in the last degree barbarous.At Venice all is graceful,
fixed, or languid; the eastern torpor is in every line,--the mark of a
school formed on severe traditions, and keeping to them, and never
likely or desirous to rise beyond them, but with an exquisite sense of
beauty, and much solemn religious faith."If the Greek outer archivolt of St.Mark's is Byzantine, the law is
somewhat broken by its busy domesticity; figures engaged in every trade,
and in the preparation of viands of all kinds; a crowded kind of London
Christmas scene, interleaved (literally) by the superb balls of leafage,
unique in sculpture; but even this is strongly opposed to the wild war
and chase passion of the Lombard.Farther, the Lombard building is as
sharp, precise, and accurate, as that of St.The
Byzantines seem to have been too lazy to put their stones together; and,
in general, my first impression on coming to Verona, after four months
in Venice, is of the exquisitely neat masonry and perfect _feeling_
here; a style of Gothic formed by a combination of Lombard surface
ornament with Pisan Gothic, than which nothing can possibly be more
chaste, pure, or solemn."I have said much of the shafts of the entrance to the crypt of St.Zeno;[96] the following note of the sculptures on the archivolt above
them is to our present purpose:

"It is covered by very light but most effective bas-reliefs of jesting
subject:--two cocks carrying on their shoulders a long staff to which a
fox (?)is tied by the legs, hanging down between them: the strut of the
foremost cock, lifting one leg at right angles to the other, is
delicious.Then a stag hunt, with a centaur horseman drawing a bow; the
arrow has gone clear through the stag's throat, and is sticking there.Several capital hunts with dogs, with fruit trees between, and birds in
them; the leaves, considering the early time, singularly well set, with
the edges outwards, sharp, and deep cut: snails and frogs filling up the
intervals, as if suspended in the air, with some saucy puppies on their
hind legs, two or three nondescript beasts; and, finally, on the centre
of one of the arches on the south side, an elephant and castle,--a very
strange elephant, yet cut as if the carver had seen one."Observe this elephant and castle; we shall meet with him farther north.Zeno are, however, quite quiet and tame
compared with those of St.Michele of Pavia, which are designed also in
a somewhat gloomier mood; significative, as I think, of indigestion.(Note that they are much earlier than St.Zeno; of the seventh century
at latest.There is more of nightmare, and less of wit in them.)Lord
Lindsay has described them admirably, but has not said half enough; the
state of mind represented by the west front is more that of a feverish
dream, than resultant from any determined architectural purpose, or even
from any definite love and delight in the grotesque.One capital is
covered with a mass of grinning heads, other heads grow out of two
bodies, or out of and under feet; the creatures are all fighting, or
devouring, or struggling which shall be uppermost, and yet in an
ineffectual way, as if they would fight for ever, and come to no
decision.Neither sphinxes nor centaurs did I notice, nor a single
peacock (I believe peacocks to be purely Byzantine), but mermaids with
_two_ tails (the sculptor having perhaps seen double at the time),
strange, large fish, apes, stags (bulls?), dogs, wolves, and horses,
griffins, eagles, long-tailed birds (cocks?), hawks, and dragons,
without end, or with a dozen of ends, as the case may be; smaller birds,
with rabbits, and small nondescripts, filling the friezes.The actual
leaf, which is used in the best Byzantine mouldings at Venice, occurs in
parts of these Pavian designs.But the Lombard animals are all _alive_,
and fiercely alive too, all impatience and spring: the Byzantine birds
peck idly at the fruit, and the animals hardly touch it with their
noses.The cinque cento birds in Venice hold it up daintily, like
train-bearers; the birds in the earlier Gothic peck at it hungrily and
naturally; but the Lombard beasts gripe at it like tigers, and tear it
off with writhing lips and glaring eyes.They are exactly like Jip with
the bit of geranium, worrying imaginary cats in it."The notice of the leaf in the above extract is important,--it is the
vine-leaf; used constantly both by Byzantines and Lombards, but by the
latter with especial frequency, though at this time they were hardly
able to indicate what they meant.It forms the most remarkable
generality of the St.Michele decoration; though, had it not luckily
been carved on the facade, twining round a stake, and with grapes, I
should never have known what it was meant for, its general form being a
succession of sharp lobes, with incised furrows to the point of each.But it is thrown about in endless change; four or five varieties of it
might be found on every cluster of capitals: and not content with this,
the Lombards hint the same form even in their griffin wings.Michele of Lucca we have perhaps the noblest instance in Italy of
the Lombard spirit in its later refinement.It is some four centuries
later than St.Michele of Pavia, and the method of workmanship is
altogether different.In the Pavian church, nearly all the ornament is
cut in a coarse sandstone, in bold relief: a darker and harder stone (I
think, not serpentine, but its surface is so disguised by the lustre of
ages that I could not be certain) is used for the capitals of the
western door, which are especially elaborate in their sculpture;--two
devilish apes, or apish devils, I know not which, with bristly
moustaches and edgy teeth, half-crouching, with their hands
impertinently on their knees, ready for a spit or a spring if one goes
near them; but all is pure bossy sculpture; there is no inlaying, except
of some variegated tiles in the shape of saucers set concave (an
ornament used also very gracefully in St.Jacopo of Bologna): and the
whole surface of the church is enriched with the massy reliefs, well
preserved everywhere above the reach of human animals, but utterly
destroyed to some five or six feet from the ground; worn away into large
cellular hollows and caverns, some almost deep enough to render the
walls unsafe, entirely owing to the uses to which the recesses of the
church are dedicated by the refined and high-minded Italians.Michele of Lucca is wrought entirely in white marble and green
serpentine; there is hardly any relieved sculpture except in the
capitals of the shafts and cornices, and all the designs of wall
ornament are inlaid with exquisite precision--white on dark ground; the
ground being cut out and filled with serpentine, the figures left in
solid marble.The designs of the Pavian church are encrusted on the
walls; of the Lucchese, incorporated with them; small portions of real
sculpture being introduced exactly where the eye, after its rest on the
flatness of the wall, will take most delight in the piece of substantial
form.The entire arrangement is perfect beyond all praise, and the
morbid restlessness of the old designs is now appeased.Geometry seems
to have acted as a febrifuge, for beautiful geometrical designs are
introduced amidst the tumult of the hunt; and there is no more seeing
double, nor ghastly monstrosity of conception; no more ending of
everything in something else; no more disputing for spare legs among
bewildered bodies; no more setting on of heads wrong side foremost.The
fragments have come together: we are out of the Inferno with its weeping
down the spine; we are in the fair hunting-fields of the Lucchese
mountains (though they had their tears also),--with horse, and hound,
and hawk; and merry blast of the trumpet.--Very strange creatures to be
hunted, in all truth; but still creatures with a single head, and that
on their shoulders, which is exactly the last place in the Pavian church
where a head is to be looked for.Cockerell wonders, in one of his lectures, why I give
so much praise to this "crazy front of Lucca."But it is not crazy; not
by any means.Altogether sober, in comparison with the early Lombard
work, or with our Norman.Crazy in one sense it is: utterly neglected,
to the breaking of its old stout heart; the venomous nights and salt
frosts of the Maremma winters have their way with it--"Poor Tom's a
cold!"The weeds that feed on the marsh air, have twisted themselves
into its crannies; the polished fragments of serpentine are spit and
rent out of their cells, and lie in green ruins along its ledges; the
salt sea winds have eaten away the fair shafting of its star window into
a skeleton of crumbling rays.It cannot stand much longer; may Heaven
only, in its benignity, preserve it from restoration, and the sands of
the Serchio give it honorable grave.In the "Seven Lamps," Plate VI., I gave a faithful drawing of one of its
upper arches, to which I must refer the reader; for there is a marked
piece of character in the figure of the horseman on the left of it.And
in making this reference, I would say a few words about those much
abused plates of the "Seven Lamps."They are black, they are overbitten,
they are hastily drawn, they are coarse and disagreeable; how
disagreeable to many readers I venture not to conceive.But their truth
is carried to an extent never before attempted in architectural drawing.It does not in the least follow that because a drawing is delicate, or
looks careful, it has been carefully drawn from the thing represented;
in nine instances out of ten, careful and delicate drawings are made at
home.It is not so easy as the reader, perhaps, imagines, to finish a
drawing altogether on the spot, especially of details seventy feet from
the ground; and any one who will try the position in which I have had to
do some of my work--standing, namely, on a cornice or window sill,
holding by one arm round a shaft, and hanging over the street (or canal,
at Venice), with my sketch-book supported against the wall from which I
was drawing, by my breast, so as to leave my right hand free--will not
thenceforward wonder that shadows should be occasionally carelessly
laid in, or lines drawn with some unsteadiness.But, steady, or infirm,
the sketches of which those plates in the "Seven Lamps" are fac-similes,
were made from the architecture itself, and represent that architecture
with its actual shadows at the time of day at which it was drawn, and
with every fissure and line of it as they now exist; so that when I am
speaking of some new point, which perhaps the drawing was not intended
to illustrate, I can yet turn back to it with perfect certainty that if
anything be found in it bearing on matters now in hand, I may depend
upon it just as securely as if I had gone back to look again at the
building.It is necessary that my readers should understand this thoroughly, and I
did not before sufficiently explain it; but I believe I can show them
the use of this kind of truth, now that we are again concerned with this
front of Lucca.They will find a drawing of the entire front in Gally
Knight's "Architecture of Italy."It may serve to give them an idea of
its general disposition, and it looks very careful and accurate; but
every bit of the ornament on it is _drawn out of the artist's head_.There is not _one line_ of it that exists on the building.The reader
will therefore, perhaps, think my ugly black plate of somewhat more
value, upon the whole, in its rough veracity, than the other in its
delicate fiction.[97]

[Illustration: Plate XXI.As, however, I made a drawing of another part of the church somewhat
more delicately, and as I do not choose that my favorite church should
suffer in honor by my coarse work, I have had this, as far as might be,
fac-similied by line engraving (Plate XXI.).It represents the southern
side of the lower arcade of the west front; and may convey some idea of
the exquisite finish and grace of the whole; but the old plate, in the
"Seven Lamps," gives a nearer view of one of the upper arches, and a
more faithful impression of the present aspect of the work, and
especially of the seats of the horsemen; the limb straight, and well
down on the stirrup (the warrior's seat, observe, not the jockey's),
with a single pointed spur on the heel.The bit of the lower cornice
under this arch I could not see, and therefore had not drawn; it was
supplied from beneath another arch.I am afraid, however, the reader has
lost the thread of my story while I have been recommending my veracity
to him.I was insisting upon the healthy tone of this Lucca work as
compared with the old spectral Lombard friezes.The apes of the Pavian
church ride without stirrups, but all is in good order and harness here:
civilisation had done its work; there was reaping of corn in the Val
d'Arno, though rough hunting still upon its hills.But in the north,
though a century or two later, we find the forests of the Rhone, and its
rude limestone cotes, haunted by phantasms still (more meat-eating,
then, I think).I do not know a more interesting group of cathedrals
than that of Lyons, Vienne, and Valencia: a more interesting indeed,
generally, than beautiful; but there is a row of niches on the west
front of Lyons, and a course of panelled decoration about its doors,
which is, without exception, the most exquisite piece of Northern Gothic
I ever beheld, and with which I know nothing that is even comparable,
except the work of the north transept of Rouen, described in the "Seven
Lamps," p.159; work of about the same date, and exactly the same plan;
quatrefoils filled with grotesques, but somewhat less finished in
execution, and somewhat less wild in imagination.I wrote down hastily,
and in their own course, the subjects of some of the quatrefoils of
Lyons; of which I here give the reader the sequence:--

   1.Elephant and castle; less graphic than the St.A huge head walking on two legs, turned backwards, hoofed; the
        head has a horn behind, with drapery over it, which ends in
        another head.A boar hunt; the boar under a tree, very spirited.A bird putting its head between its legs to bite its own tail,
        which ends in a head.A dragon with a human head set on the wrong way.Peter awakened by the angel in prison; full of spirit, the
        prison picturesque, with a trefoiled arch, the angel eager, St.The miraculous draught of fishes; fish and all, in the small
        space.A large leaf, with two snails rampant, coming out of nautilus
        shells, with grotesque faces, and eyes at the ends of their
        horns.A man with an axe striking at a dog's head, which comes out of
        a nautilus shell: the rim of the shell branches into a stem
        with two large leaves.Sebastian; his body very full of arrows.Beasts coming to ark; Noah opening a kind of wicker cage.A vine leaf with a dragon's head and tail, the one biting the
        other.A man riding a goat, catching a flying devil.An eel or muraena growing into a bunch of flowers, which turns
        into two wings.A sprig of hazel, with nuts, thrown all around the quatrefoils
        with a squirrel in centre, apparently attached to the tree only
        by its enormous tail, richly furrowed into hair, and nobly
        sweeping.Four hares fastened together by the ears, galloping in a circle.Mingled with these grotesques are many _sword_ and _buckler_
        combats, the bucklers being round and conical like a hat; I
        thought the first I noticed, carried by a man at full gallop on
        horseback, had been a small umbrella.This list of subjects may sufficiently illustrate the feverish character
of the Northern Energy; but influencing the treatment of the whole there
is also the Northern love of what is called the Grotesque, a feeling
which I find myself, for the present, quite incapable either of
analysing or defining, though we all have a distinct idea attached to
the word: I shall try, however, in the next volume.WOODEN CHURCHES OF THE NORTH.I cannot pledge myself to this theory of the origin of the vaulting
shaft, but the reader will find some interesting confirmations of it in
Dahl's work on the wooden churches of Norway.The inside view of the
church of Borgund shows the timber construction of one shaft run up
through a crossing architrave, and continued into the clerestory; while
the church of Urnes is in the exact form of a basilica; but the wall
above the arches is formed of planks, with a strong upright above each
capital.The passage quoted from Stephen Eddy's Life of Bishop Wilfrid,
at p.86 of Churton's "Early English Church," gives us one of the
transformations or petrifactions of the wooden Saxon churches."At Ripon
he built a new church of _polished stone_, with columns variously
ornamented, and porches."Churton adds: "It was perhaps in bad
imitation of the marble buildings he had seen in Italy, that he washed
the walls of this original York Minster, and made them 'whiter than
snow.'"CHURCH OF ALEXANDRIA.The very cause which enabled the Venetians to possess themselves of the
body of St.Mark, was the destruction of the church by the caliph for
the _sake of its marbles_: the Arabs and Venetians, though bitter
enemies, thus building on the same models; these in reverence for the
destroyed church, and those with the very pieces of it.In the somewhat
prolix account of the matter given in the Notizie Storiche (above
quoted) the main points are, that "il Califa de' Saraceni, per
fabbricarsi un Palazzo presse di Babilonia, aveva ordinato che dalle
Chiese d' Cristiani si togliessero i piu scelti marmi;" and that the
Venetians, "videro sotto i loro occhi flagellarsi crudelmente un
Cristiano per aver infranto un marmo."I heartily wish that the same
kind of punishment were enforced to this day, for the same sin.I am glad here to re-assert opinions which it has grieved me to be
suspected of having changed.The calmer tone of the second volume of
"Modern Painters," as compared with the first, induced, I believe, this
suspicion, very justifiably, in the minds of many of its readers.The
difference resulted, however, from the simple fact, that the first was
written in great haste and indignation, for a special purpose and
time;--the second, after I had got engaged, almost unawares, in
inquiries which could not be hastily nor indignantly pursued; my
opinions remaining then, and remaining now, altogether unchanged on the
subject which led me into the discussion.And that no farther doubt of
them may be entertained by any who may think them worth questioning, I
shall here, once for all, express them in the plainest and fewest words
I can.I think that J. M. W. Turner is not only the greatest (professed)
landscape painter who ever lived, but that he has in him as much as
would have furnished all the rest with such power as they had; and that
if we put Nicolo Poussin, Salvator, and our own Gainsborough out of the
group, he would cut up into Claudes, Cuyps, Ruysdaels, and such others,
by uncounted bunches.I hope this is plainly and strongly enough stated.And farther, I like his later pictures, up to the year 1845, the best;
and believe that those persons who only like his early pictures do not,
in fact, like him at all.They do _not_ like that which is essentially
_his_.They like that in which he resembles other men; which he had
learned from Loutherbourg, Claude, or Wilson; that which is indeed his
own, they do not care for.Not that there is not much of his own in his
early works; they are all invaluable in their way; but those persons who
can find no beauty in his strangest fantasy on the Academy walls, cannot
distinguish the peculiarly Turneresque characters of the earlier
pictures.And, therefore, I again state here, that I think his pictures
painted between the years 1830 and 1845 his greatest; and that his
entire power is best represented by such pictures as the Temeraire, the
Sun of Venice going to Sea, and others, painted exactly at the time when
the public and the press were together loudest in abuse of him.I desire, however, the reader to observe that I said, above, _professed_
landscape painters, among whom, perhaps, I should hardly have put
Gainsborough.The landscape of the great figure painters is often
majestic in the highest degree, and Tintoret's especially shows exactly
the same power and feeling as Turner's.If with Turner I were to rank
the historical painters as landscapists, estimating rather the power
they show, than the actual value of the landscape they produced, I
should class those, whose landscapes I have studied, in some such order
as this at the side of the page:--associating with the landscape of
Perugino that of Francia and Angelico, and the other severe painters of
religious subjects.I have put Turner and Tintoret side by side, not
knowing which is, in landscape, the greater; I had nearly associated in
the same manner the noble names of John Bellini and Albert Durer; but
Bellini must be put first, for his profound religious peace yet not
separated from the other, if but that we might remember his kindness to
him in Venice; and it is well we should take note of it here, for it
furnishes us with a most interesting confirmation of what was said in
the text respecting the position of Bellini as the last of the religious
painters of Venice.The following passage is quoted in Jackson's "Essay
on Wood-engraving," from Albert Durer's Diary:

"I have many good friends among the Italians who warn me not to eat or
drink with their painters, of whom several are my enemies, and copy my
picture in the church, and others of mine, wherever they can find them,
and yet they blame them, _and say they are not according to ancient art,
and therefore not good_.Giovanni Bellini, however, has praised me
highly to several gentlemen, and wishes to have something of my doing:
he called on me himself, and requested that I would paint a picture for
him, for which, he said, he would pay me well.People are all surprised
that I should be so much thought of by a person of his reputation: he is
very old, but is still the best painter of them all."A choice little piece of description this, of the Renaissance painters,
side by side with the good old Venetian, who was soon to leave them to
their own ways.The Renaissance men are seen in perfection, envying,
stealing, and lying, but without wit enough to lie to purpose.It is of the highest importance, in these days, that Romanism should be
deprived of the miserable influence which its pomp and picturesqueness
have given it over the weak sentimentalism of the English people; I call
it a miserable influence, for of all motives to sympathy with the Church
of Rome, this I unhesitatingly class as the basest: I can, in some
measure, respect the other feelings which have been the beginnings of
apostasy; I can respect the desire for unity which would reclaim the
Romanist by love, and the distrust of his own heart which subjects the
proselyte to priestly power; I say I can respect these feelings, though
I cannot pardon unprincipled submission to them, nor enough wonder at
the infinite fatuity of the unhappy persons whom they have
betrayed:--Fatuity, self-inflicted, and stubborn in resistance to God's
Word and man's reason!--to talk of the authority of the Church, as if
the Church were anything else than the whole company of Christian men,
or were ever spoken of in Scripture[98] as other than a company to be
taught and fed, not to teach and feed.--Fatuity!to talk of a separation
of Church and State, as if a Christian state, and every officer therein,
were not necessarily a part of the Church,[99] and as if any state
officer could do his duty without endeavoring to aid and promote
religion, or any clerical officer do his duty without seeking for such
aid and accepting it:--Fatuity!to seek for the unity of a living body
of truth and trust in God, with a dead body of lies and trust in wood,
and thence to expect anything else than plague, and consumption by worms
undying, for both.to ask for any better
interpreter of God's Word than God, or to expect knowledge of it in any
other way than the plainly ordered way: if _any_ man will do he shall
know.But of all these fatuities, the basest is the being lured into the
Romanist Church by the glitter of it, like larks into a trap by broken
glass; to be blown into a change of religion by the whine of an
organ-pipe; stitched into a new creed by gold threads on priests'
petticoats; jangled into a change of conscience by the chimes of a
belfry.I know nothing in the shape of error so dark as this, no
imbecility so absolute, no treachery so contemptible.I had hardly
believed that it was a thing possible, though vague stories had been
told me of the effect, on some minds, of mere scarlet and candles, until
I came on this passage in Pugin's "Remarks on articles in the
Rambler":--

"Those who have lived in want and privation are the best qualified to
appreciate the blessings of plenty; thus, those who have been devout and
sincere members of the separated portion of the English Church; who have
prayed, and hoped, and loved, through all the poverty of the maimed
rites which it has retained--to them does the realisation of all their
longing desires appear truly ravishing.when one of the solemn piles is presented to them,
in all its pristine life and glory!--the stoups are filled to the brim;
the rood is raised on high; the screen glows with sacred imagery and
rich device; the niches are filled; the altar is replaced, sustained by
sculptured shafts, the relics of the saints repose beneath, the body of
Our Lord is enshrined on its consecrated stone; the lamps of the
sanctuary burn bright; the saintly portraitures in the glass windows
shine all gloriously; and the albs hang in the oaken ambries, and the
cope chests are filled with orphreyed baudekins; and pix and pax, and
chrismatory are there, and thurible, and cross."One might have put this man under a pix, and left him, one should have
thought; but he has been brought forward, and partly received, as an
example of the effect of ceremonial splendor on the mind of a great
architect.It is very necessary, therefore, that all those who have felt
sorrow at this should know at once that he is not a great architect,
but one of the smallest possible or conceivable architects; and that by
his own account and setting forth of himself.Hear him:--

"I believe, as regards architecture, few men have been so unfortunate as
myself.I have passed my life in thinking of fine things, studying fine
things, designing fine things, and realising very poor ones.I have
never had the chance of producing a single fine ecclesiastical building,
except my own church, where I am both paymaster and architect; but
everything else, either for want of adequate funds or injudicious
interference and control, or some other contingency, is more or less a
failure.George's was spoilt by the very instructions laid down by the
committee, that it was to hold 3000 people on the floor at a limited
price; in consequence, height, proportion, everything, was sacrificed to
meet these conditions.Nottingham was spoilt by the style being
restricted to lancet,--a period well suited to a Cistercian abbey in a
secluded vale, but very unsuitable for the centre of a crowded
town.* * *

"Kirkham was spoilt through several hundred pounds being reduced on the
original estimate; to effect this, which was a great sum in proportion
to the entire cost, the area of the church was contracted, the walls
lowered, tower and spire reduced, the thickness of walls diminished, and
stone arches omitted."(Remarks, &c., by A. Welby Pugin: Dolman, 1850.)Phidias can niche himself into the corner of a pediment, and
Raffaelle expatiate within the circumference of a clay platter; but
Pugin is inexpressible in less than a cathedral?Let his ineffableness
be assured of this, once for all, that no difficulty or restraint ever
happened to a man of real power, but his power was the more manifested
in the contending with, or conquering it; and that there is no field so
small, no cranny so contracted, but that a great spirit can house and
manifest itself therein.The thunder that smites the Alp into dust, can
gather itself into the width of a golden wire.Whatever greatness there
was in you, had it been Buonarroti's own, you had room enough for it in
a single niche: you might have put the whole power of it into two feet
cube of Caen stone.George's was not high enough for want of money?But was it want of money that made you put that blunt, overloaded,
laborious ogee door into the side of it?Was it for lack of funds that
you sunk the tracery of the parapet in its clumsy zigzags?Was it in
parsimony that you buried its paltry pinnacles in that eruption of
diseased crockets?or in pecuniary embarrassment that you set up the
belfry foolscaps, with the mimicry of dormer windows, which nobody can
ever reach nor look out of?Not so, but in mere incapability of better
things.I am sorry to have to speak thus of any living architect; and there is
much in this man, if he were rightly estimated, which one might both
regard and profit by.He has a most sincere love for his profession, a
heartily honest enthusiasm for pixes and piscinas; and though he will
never design so much as a pix or a piscina thoroughly well, yet better
than most of the experimental architects of the day.Employ him by all
means, but on small work.Expect no cathedrals from him; but no one, at
present, can design a better finial.That is an exceedingly beautiful
one over the western door of St.George's; and there is some spirited
impishness and switching of tails in the supporting figures at the
imposts.Only do not allow his good designing of finials to be employed
as an evidence in matters of divinity, nor thence deduce the
incompatibility of Protestantism and art.I should have said all that I
have said above, of artistical apostasy, if Giotto had been now living
in Florence, and if art were still doing all that it did once for Rome.But the grossness of the error becomes incomprehensible as well as
unpardonable, when we look to what level of degradation the human
intellect has sunk at this instant in Italy.So far from Romanism now
producing anything greater in art, it cannot even preserve what has been
given to its keeping.I know no abuses of precious inheritance half so
grievous, as the abuse of all that is best in art wherever the Romanist
priesthood gets possession of it.The noblest pieces of mediaeval sculpture in North Italy, the two
griffins at the central (west) door of the cathedral of Verona, were
daily permitted to be brought into service, when I was there in the
autumn of 1849, by a washerwoman living in the Piazza, who tied her
clothes-lines to their beaks: and the shafts of St.Mark's at Venice
were used by a salesman of common caricatures to fasten his prints upon
(Compare Appendix 25); and this in the face of the continually passing
priests: while the quantity of noble art annually destroyed in
altarpieces by candle-droppings, or perishing by pure brutality of
neglect, passes all estimate.I do not know, as I have repeatedly
stated, how far the splendor of architecture, or other art, is
compatible with the honesty and usefulness of religious service.The
longer I live, the more I incline to severe judgment in this matter, and
the less I can trust the sentiments excited by painted glass and 
tiles.But if there be indeed value in such things, our plain duty is to
direct our strength against the superstition which has dishonored them;
there are thousands who might possibly be benefited by them, to whom
they are now merely an offence, owing to their association with
idolatrous ceremonies.I have but this exhortation for all who love
them,--not to regulate their creeds by their taste in colors, but to
hold calmly to the right, at whatever present cost to their imaginative
enjoyment; sure that they will one day find in heavenly truth a brighter
charm than in earthly imagery, and striving to gather stones for the
eternal building, whose walls shall be salvation, and whose gates shall
be praise.The reader may at first suppose this division of the attributes of
buildings into action, voice, and beauty, to be the same division as Mr.Fergusson's, now well known, of their merits, into technic, aesthetic and
phonetic.But there is no connection between the two systems; mine, indeed, does
not profess to be a system, it is a mere arrangement of my subject, for
the sake of order and convenience in its treatment: but, as far as it
goes, it differs altogether from Mr.Fergusson's in these two following
respects:--

The action of a building, that is to say its standing or consistence,
depends on its good construction; and the first part of the foregoing
volume has been entirely occupied with the consideration of the
constructive merit of buildings: but construction is not their only
technical merit.There is as much of technical merit in their
expression, or in their beauty, as in their construction.There is no
more mechanical or technical admirableness in the stroke of the painter
who covers them with fresco, than in the dexterity of the mason who
cements their stones: there is just as much of what is technical in
their beauty, therefore, as in their construction; and, on the other
hand, there is often just as much intellect shown in their construction
as there is in either their expression or decoration.Fergusson
means by his "Phonetic" division, whatever expresses intellect: my
constructive division, therefore, includes part of his phonetic: and my
expressive and decorative divisions include part of his technical.Fergusson tries to make the same divisions fit the
_subjects_ of art, and art itself; and therefore talks of technic,
aesthetic, and phonetic, _arts_, (or, translating the Greek,) of artful
arts, sensitive arts, and talkative arts; but I have nothing to do with
any division of the arts, I have to deal only with the merits of
_buildings_.As, however, I have been led into reference to Mr.Fergusson's system, I would fain say a word or two to effect Mr.Fergusson's extrication from it.I hope to find in him a noble ally,
ready to join with me in war upon affectation, falsehood, and prejudice,
of every kind: I have derived much instruction from his most interesting
work, and I hope for much more from its continuation; but he must
disentangle himself from his system, or he will be strangled by it;
never was anything so ingeniously and hopelessly wrong throughout; the
whole of it is founded on a confusion of the instruments of man with his
capacities.Fergusson would have us take--

  "First, man's muscular action or power.""Secondly, those developments of sense _by_ which _he does!!_ as much
    as by his muscles.""Lastly, his intellect, or to confine this more correctly to its
    external action, _his power of speech!!Granting this division of humanity correct, or sufficient, the writer
then most curiously supposes that he may arrange the arts as if there
were some belonging to each division of man,--never observing that every
art must be governed by, and addressed to, one division, and executed by
another; executed by the muscular, addressed to the sensitive or
intellectual; and that, to be an art at all, it must have in it work of
the one, and guidance from the other.If, by any lucky accident, he had
been led to arrange the arts, either by their objects, and the things to
which they are addressed, or by their means, and the things by which
they are executed, he would have discovered his mistake in an instant.As thus:--

  These arts are addressed to the,--Muscles!!Senses,
                                    Intellect;
                   or executed by,--Muscles,
                                    Senses!!Indeed it is true that some of the arts are in a sort addressed to the
muscles, surgery for instance; but this is not among Mr.Fergusson's
technic, but his politic, arts!and all the arts may, in a sort, be said
to be performed by the senses, as the senses guide both muscles and
intellect in their work: but they guide them as they receive
information, or are standards of accuracy, but not as in themselves
capable of action.Fergusson is, I believe, the first person who has
told us of senses that act or do, they having been hitherto supposed
only to sustain or perceive.The weight of error, however, rests just as
much in the original division of man, as in the endeavor to fit the arts
to it.The slight omission of the soul makes a considerable difference
when it begins to influence the final results of the arrangement.Fergusson calls morals and religion "Politick arts" (as if religion
were an art at all!or as if both were not as necessary to individuals
as to societies); and therefore, forming these into a body of arts by
themselves, leaves the best of the arts to do without the soul and the
moral feeling as rest they may.Hence "expression," or "phonetics," is
of intellect only (as if men never expressed their _feelings!_); and
then, strangest and worst of all, intellect is entirely resolved into
talking!There can be no intellect but it must talk, and all talking
must be intellectual.I believe people do sometimes talk without
understanding; and I think the world would fare ill if they never
understood without talking.The intellect is an entirely silent faculty,
and has nothing to do with parts of speech any more than the moral part
has.A man may feel and know things without expressing either the
feeling or knowledge; and the talking is a _muscular_ mode of
communicating the workings of the intellect or heart--muscular, whether
it be by tongue or by sign, or by carving or writing, or by expression
of feature; so that to divide a man into muscular and talking parts, is
to divide him into body in general, and tongue in particular, the
endless confusion resulting from which arrangement is only less
marvellous in itself, than the resolution with which Mr.Fergusson has
worked through it, and in spite of it, up to some very interesting and
suggestive truths; although starting with a division of humanity which
does not in the least raise it above the brute, for a rattlesnake has
his muscular, aesthetic, and talking part as much as man, only he talks
with his tail, and says, "I am angry with you, and should like to bite
you," more laconically and effectively than any phonetic biped could,
were he so minded.And, in fact, the real difference between the brute
and man is not so much that the one has fewer means of expression than
the other, as that it has fewer thoughts to express, and that we do not
understand its expressions.Animals can talk to one another intelligibly
enough when they have anything to say, and their captains have words of
command just as clear as ours, and better obeyed.We have indeed, in
watching the efforts of an intelligent animal to talk to a human being,
a melancholy sense of its dumbness; but the fault is still in its
intelligence, more than in its tongue.It has not wit enough to
systematise its cries or signs, and form them into language.But there is no end to the fallacies and confusions of Mr.Fergusson's
arrangement.It is a perfect entanglement of gun-cotton, and explodes
into vacuity wherever one holds a light to it.I shall leave him to do
so with the rest of it for himself, and should perhaps have left it to
his own handling altogether, but for the intemperateness of the spirit
with which he has spoken on a subject perhaps of all others demanding
gentleness and caution.No man could more earnestly have desired the
changes lately introduced into the system of the University of Oxford
than I did myself: no man can be more deeply sensible than I of grievous
failures in the practical working even of the present system: but I
believe that these failures may be almost without exception traced to
one source, the want of evangelical, and the excess of rubrical religion
among the tutors; together with such rustinesses and stiffnesses as
necessarily attend the continual operation of any intellectual machine.The fault is, at any rate, far less in the system than in the
imperfection of its administration; and had it been otherwise, the terms
in which Mr.Fergusson speaks of it are hardly decorous in one who can
but be imperfectly acquainted with its working.They are sufficiently
answered by the structure of the essay in which they occur; for if the
high powers of mind which its author possesses had been subjected to the
discipline of the schools, he could not have wasted his time on the
development of a system which their simplest formulae of logic would have
shown him to be untenable.Fergusson will, however, find it easier to overthrow his system than
to replace it.Every man of science knows the difficulty of arranging a
_reasonable_ system of classification, in any subject, by any one group
of characters; and that the best classifications are, in many of their
branches, convenient rather than reasonable: so that, to any person who
is really master of his subject, many different modes of classification
will occur at different times; one of which he will use rather than
another, according to the point which he has to investigate.I need only
instance the three arrangements of minerals, by their external
characters, and their positive or negative bases, of which the first is
the most useful, the second the most natural, the third the most simple;
and all in several ways unsatisfactory.But when the subject becomes one which no single mind can grasp, and
which embraces the whole range of human occupation and enquiry, the
difficulties become as great, and the methods as various, as the uses to
which the classification might be put; and Mr.Fergusson has entirely
forgotten to inform us what is the object to which his arrangements are
addressed.For observe: there is one kind of arrangement which is based
on the rational connection of the sciences or arts with one another; an
arrangement which maps them out like the rivers of some great country,
and marks the points of their junction, and the direction and force of
their united currents; and this without assigning to any one of them a
superiority above another, but considering them all as necessary members
of the noble unity of human science and effort.There is another kind of
classification which contemplates the order of succession in which they
might most usefully be presented to a single mind, so that the given
mind should obtain the most effective and available knowledge of them
all: and, finally, the most usual classification contemplates the powers
of mind which they each require for their pursuit, the objects to which
they are addressed, or with which they are concerned; and assigns to
each of them a rank superior or inferior, according to the nobility of
the powers they require, or the grandeur of the subjects they
contemplate.Now, not only would it be necessary to adopt a different classification
with respect to each of these great intentions, but it might be found so
even to vary the order of the succession of sciences in the case of
every several mind to which they were addressed; and that their rank
would also vary with the power and specific character of the mind
engaged upon them.I once heard a very profound mathematician
remonstrate against the impropriety of Wordsworth's receiving a pension
from government, on the ground that he was "only a poet."If the study
of mathematics had always this narrowing effect upon the sympathies, the
science itself would need to be deprived of the rank usually assigned to
it; and there could be no doubt that, in the effect it had on the mind
of this man, and of such others, it was a very contemptible science
indeed.Hence, in estimating the real rank of any art or science, it is
necessary for us to conceive it as it would be grasped by minds of every
order.There are some arts and sciences which we underrate, because no
one has risen to show us with what majesty they may be invested; and
others which we overrate, because we are blinded to their general
meanness by the magnificence which some one man has thrown around them:
thus, philology, evidently the most contemptible of all the sciences,
has been raised to unjust dignity by Johnson.[100] And the subject is
farther complicated by the question of usefulness; for many of the arts
and sciences require considerable intellectual power for their pursuit,
and yet become contemptible by the slightness of what they accomplish:
metaphysics, for instance, exercising intelligence of a high order, yet
useless to the mass of mankind, and, to its own masters, dangerous.Yet,
as it has become so by the want of the true intelligence which its
inquiries need, and by substitution of vain subtleties in its stead, it
may in future vindicate for itself a higher rank than a man of common
sense usually concedes to it.Nevertheless, the mere attempt at arrangement must be useful, even where
it does nothing more than develop difficulties.Perhaps the greatest
fault of men of learning is their so often supposing all other branches
of science dependent upon or inferior to their own best beloved branch;
and the greatest deficiency of men comparatively unlearned, their want
of perception of the connection of the branches with each other.He who
holds the tree only by the extremities, can perceive nothing but the
separation of its sprays.It must always be desirable to prove to those
the equality of rank, to these the closeness of sequence, of what they
had falsely supposed subordinate or separate.And, after such candid
admission of the co-equal dignity of the truly noble arts and sciences,
we may be enabled more justly to estimate the inferiority of those which
indeed seem intended for the occupation of inferior powers and narrower
capacities.In Appendix 14, following, some suggestions will be found as
to the principles on which classification might be based; but the
arrangement of all the arts is certainly not a work which could with
discretion be attempted in the Appendix to an essay on a branch of one
of them.The reader will probably understand this part of the subject better if
he will take the trouble briefly to consider the actions of the mind and
body of man in the sciences and arts, which give these latter the
relations of rank usually attributed to them.It was above observed (Appendix 13) that the arts were generally ranked
according to the nobility of the powers they require, that is to say,
the quantity of the being of man which they engaged or addressed.Now
their rank is not a very important matter as regards each other, for
there are few disputes more futile than that concerning the respective
dignity of arts, all of which are necessary and honorable.But it is a
very important matter as regards themselves; very important whether
they are practised with the devotion and regarded with the respect
which are necessary or due to their perfection.It does not at all
matter whether architecture or sculpture be the nobler art; but it
matters much whether the thought is bestowed upon buildings, or the
feeling is expressed in statues, which make either deserving of our
admiration.It is foolish and insolent to imagine that the art which we
ourselves practise is greater than any other; but it is wise to take
care that in our own hands it is as noble as we can make it.Let us take
some notice, therefore, in what degrees the faculties of man may be
engaged in his several arts: we may consider the entire man as made up
of body, soul, and intellect (Lord Lindsay, meaning the same thing, says
inaccurately--sense, intellect, and spirit--forgetting that there is a
moral sense as well as a bodily sense, and a spiritual body as well as a
natural body, and so gets into some awkward confusion, though right in
the main points).Then, taking the word soul as a short expression of
the moral and responsible part of being, each of these three parts has a
passive and active power.The body has senses and muscles; the soul,
feeling and resolution; the intellect, understanding and imagination.The scheme may be put into tabular form, thus:--

              Passive or Receptive Part.Body                  Senses.Soul                  Feeling.Intellect             Understanding.In this scheme I consider memory a part of understanding, and conscience
I leave out, as being the voice of God in the heart, inseparable from
the system, yet not an essential part of it.The sense of beauty I
consider a mixture of the Senses of the body and soul.Now all these parts of the human system have a reciprocal action on one
another, so that the true perfection of any of them is not possible
without some relative perfection of the others, and yet any one of the
parts of the system may be brought into a morbid development,
inconsistent with the perfection of the others.Thus, in a healthy
state, the acuteness of the senses quickens that of the feelings, and
these latter quicken the understanding, and then all the three quicken
the imagination, and then all the four strengthen the resolution; while
yet there is a danger, on the other hand, that the encouraged and morbid
feeling may weaken or bias the understanding, or that the over shrewd
and keen understanding may shorten the imagination, or that the
understanding and imagination together may take place of, or undermine,
the resolution, as in Hamlet.So in the mere bodily frame there is a
delightful perfection of the senses, consistent with the utmost health
of the muscular system, as in the quick sight and hearing of an active
savage: another false delicacy of the senses, in the Sybarite,
consequent on their over indulgence, until the doubled rose-leaf is
painful; and this inconsistent with muscular perfection.Again; there is
a perfection of muscular action consistent with exquisite sense, as in
that of the fingers of a musician or of a painter, in which the muscles
are guided by the slightest feeling of the strings, or of the pencil:
another perfection of muscular action inconsistent with acuteness of
sense, as in the effort of battle, in which a soldier does not perceive
his wounds.So that it is never so much the question, what is the
solitary perfection of a given part of the man, as what is its balanced
perfection in relation to the whole of him: and again, the perfection of
any single power is not merely to be valued by the mere rank of the
power itself, but by the harmony which it indicates among the other
powers.Thus, for instance, in an archer's glance along his arrow, or a
hunter's raising of his rifle, there is a certain perfection of sense
and finger which is the result of mere practice, of a simple bodily
perfection; but there is a farther value in the habit which results from
the resolution and intellect necessary to the forming of it: in the
hunter's raising of his rifle there is a quietness implying far more
than mere practice,--implying courage, and habitual meeting of danger,
and presence of mind, and many other such noble characters.So also in a
musician's way of laying finger on his instrument, or a painter's
handling of his pencil, there are many qualities expressive of the
special sensibilities of each, operating on the production of the habit,
besides the sensibility operating at the moment of action.So that there
are three distinct stages of merit in what is commonly called mere
bodily dexterity: the first, the dexterity given by practice, called
command of tools or of weapons; the second stage, the dexterity or
grace given by character, as the gentleness of hand proceeding from
modesty or tenderness of spirit, and the steadiness of it resulting from
habitual patience coupled with decision, and the thousand other
characters partially discernible, even in a man's writing, much more in
his general handiwork; and, thirdly, there is the perfection of action
produced by the operation of _present_ strength, feeling, or
intelligence on instruments thus _previously_ perfected, as the handling
of a great painter is rendered more beautiful by his immediate care and
feeling and love of his subject, or knowledge of it, and as physical
strength is increased by strength of will and greatness of heart.Imagine, for instance, the difference in manner of fighting, and in
actual muscular strength and endurance, between a common soldier, and a
man in the circumstances of the Horatii, or of the temper of Leonidas.Mere physical skill, therefore, the mere perfection and power of the
body as an instrument, is manifested in three stages:

  First, Bodily power by practice;
  Secondly, Bodily power by moral habit;
  Thirdly, Bodily power by immediate energy;

and the arts will be greater or less, caeteris paribus, according to the
degrees of these dexterities which they admit.A smith's work at his
anvil admits little but the first; fencing, shooting, and riding, admit
something of the second; while the fine arts admit (merely through the
channel of the bodily dexterities) an expression almost of the whole
man.Nevertheless, though the higher arts _admit_ this higher bodily
perfection, they do not all _require_ it in equal degrees, but can
dispense with it more and more in proportion to their dignity.The arts
whose chief element is bodily dexterity, may be classed together as arts
of the third order, of which the highest will be those which admit most
of the power of moral habit and energy, such as riding and the
management of weapons; and the rest may be thrown together under the
general title of handicrafts, of which it does not much matter which are
the most honorable, but rather, which are the most necessary and least
injurious to health, which it is not our present business to examine.Men engaged in the practice of these are called artizans, as opposed to
artists, who are concerned with the fine arts.The next step in elevation of art is the addition of the intelligences
which have no connection with bodily dexterity; as, for instance, in
hunting, the knowledge of the habits of animals and their places of
abode; in architecture, of mathematics; in painting, of harmonies of
color; in music, of those of sound; all this pure science being joined
with readiness of expedient in applying it, and with shrewdness in
apprehension of difficulties, either present or probable.It will often happen that intelligence of this kind is possessed without
bodily dexterity, or the need of it; one man directing and another
executing, as for the most part in architecture, war, and seamanship.And it is to be observed, also, that in proportion to the dignity of the
art, the bodily dexterities needed even in its subordinate agents become
less important, and are more and more replaced by intelligence; as in
the steering of a ship, the bodily dexterity required is less than in
shooting or fencing, but the intelligence far greater: and so in war,
the mere swordsmanship and marksmanship of the troops are of small
importance in comparison with their disposition, and right choice of the
moment of action.So that arts of this second order must be estimated,
not by the quantity of bodily dexterity they require, but by the
quantity and dignity of the knowledge needed in their practice, and by
the degree of subtlety needed in bringing such knowledge into play.War
certainly stands first in the general mind, not only as the greatest of
the arts which I have called of the second order, but as the greatest of
all arts.It is not, however, easy to distinguish the respect paid to
the Power, from that rendered to the Art of the soldier; the honor of
victory being more dependent, in the vulgar mind, on its results, than
its difficulties.I believe, however, that taking into consideration the
greatness of the anxieties under which this art must be practised, the
multitude of circumstances to be known and regarded in it, and the
subtleties both of apprehension and stratagem constantly demanded by it,
as well as the multiplicity of disturbing accidents and doubtful
contingencies against which it must make provision on the instant, it
must indeed rank as far the first of the arts of the second order; and
next to this great art of killing, medicine being much like war in its
stratagems and watchings against its dark and subtle death-enemy.Then the arts of the first order will be those in which the Imaginative
part of the intellect and the Sensitive part of the soul are joined: as
poetry, architecture, and painting; these forming a kind of cross, in
their part of the scheme of the human being, with those of the second
order, which wed the Intelligent part of the intellect and Resolute part
of the soul.But the reader must feel more and more, at every step, the
impossibility of classing the arts themselves, independently of the men
by whom they are practised; and how an art, low in itself, may be made
noble by the quantity of human strength and being which a great man will
pour into it; and an art, great in itself, be made mean by the meanness
of the mind occupied in it.I do not intend, when I call painting an art
of the first, and war an art of the second, order, to class Dutch
landscape painters with good soldiers; but I mean, that if from such a
man as Napoleon we were to take away the honor of all that he had done
in law and civil government, and to give him the reputation of his
soldiership only, his name would be less, if justly weighed, than that
of Buonarroti, himself a good soldier also, when need was.But I will
not endeavor to pursue the inquiry, for I believe that of all the arts
of the first order it would be found that all that a man has, or is, or
can be, he can fully express in them, and give to any of them, and find
it not enough.The same rapid judgment which I wish to enable the reader to form of
architecture, may in some sort also be formed of painting, owing to the
close connection between execution and expression in the latter; as
between structure and expression in the former.We ought to be able to
tell good painting by a side glance as we pass along a gallery; and,
until we can do so, we are not fit to pronounce judgment at all: not
that I class this easily visible excellence of painting with the great
expressional qualities which time and watchfulness only unfold.I have
again and again insisted on the supremacy of these last and shall
always continue to do so.But I perceive a tendency among some of the
more thoughtful critics of the day to forget that the business of a
painter is to _paint_, and so altogether to despise those men, Veronese
and Rubens for instance, who were painters, par excellence, and in whom
the expressional qualities are subordinate.Now it is well, when we have
strong moral or poetical feeling manifested in painting, to mark this as
the best part of the work; but it is not well to consider as a thing of
small account, the painter's language in which that feeling is conveyed,
for if that language be not good and lovely, the man may indeed be a
just moralist or a great poet, but he is not a _painter_, and it was
wrong of him to paint.He had much better put his morality into sermons,
and his poetry into verse, than into a language of which he was not
master.And this mastery of the language is that of which we should be
cognizant by a glance of the eye; and if that be not found, it is wasted
time to look farther: the man has mistaken his vocation, and his
expression of himself will be cramped by his awkward efforts to do what
he was not fit to do.On the other hand, if the man be a painter indeed,
and have the gift of colors and lines, what is in him will come from his
hand freely and faithfully; and the language itself is so difficult and
so vast, that the mere possession of it argues the man is great, and
that his works are worth reading.So that I have never yet seen the case
in which this true artistical excellence, visible by the eye-glance, was
not the index of some true expressional worth in the work.Neither have
I ever seen a good expressional work without high artistical merit: and
that this is ever denied is only owing to the narrow view which men are
apt to take both of expression and of art; a narrowness consequent on
their own especial practice and habits of thought.A man long trained to
love the monk's visions of Fra Angelico, turns in proud and ineffable
disgust from the first work of Rubens which he encounters on his return
across the Alps.He has forgotten,
that while Angelico prayed and wept in his _olive shade_, there was
different work doing in the dank fields of Flanders;--wild seas to be
banked out; endless canals to be dug, and boundless marshes to be
drained; hard ploughing and harrowing of the frosty clay; careful
breeding of stout horses and fat cattle; close setting of brick walls
against cold winds and snow; much hardening of hands and gross
stoutening of bodies in all this; gross jovialities of harvest homes and
Christmas feasts, which were to be the reward of it; rough affections,
and sluggish imagination; fleshy, substantial, ironshod humanities, but
humanities still; humanities which God had his eye upon, and which won,
perhaps, here and there, as much favor in his sight as the wasted
aspects of the whispering monks of Florence (Heaven forbid it should not
be so, since the most of us cannot be monks, but must be ploughmen and
reapers still).And are we to suppose there is no nobility in Rubens'
masculine and universal sympathy with all this, and with his large human
rendering of it, Gentleman though he was, by birth, and feeling, and
education, and place; and, when he chose, lordly in conception also?He
had his faults, perhaps great and lamentable faults, though more those
of his time and his country than his own; he has neither cloister
breeding nor boudoir breeding, and is very unfit to paint either in
missals or annuals; but he has an open sky and wide-world breeding in
him, that we may not be offended with, fit alike for king's court,
knight's camp, or peasant's cottage.On the other hand, a man trained
here in England, in our Sir Joshua school, will not and cannot allow
that there is any art at all in the technical work of Angelico.But he
is just as wrong as the other.Fra Angelico is as true a master of the
art necessary to his purposes, as Rubens was of that necessary for his.We have been taught in England to think there can be no virtue but in a
loaded brush and rapid hand; but if we can shake our common sense free
of such teaching, we shall understand that there is art also in the
delicate point and in the hand which trembles as it moves; not because
it is more liable to err, but because there is more danger in its error,
and more at stake upon its precision.The art of Angelico, both as a
colorist and a draughtsman, is consummate; so perfect and beautiful,
that his work may be recognised at any distance by the rainbow-play and
brilliancy of it: However closely it may be surrounded by other works of
the same school, glowing with enamel and gold, Angelico's may be told
from them at a glance, like so many huge pieces of opal lying among
common marbles.So again with Giotto; the Arena chapel is not only the
most perfect expressional work, it is the prettiest piece of wall
decoration and fair color, in North Italy.Now there is a correspondence of the same kind between the technical and
expressional parts of architecture;--not a true or entire
correspondence, so that when the expression is best, the building must
be also best; but so much of correspondence as that good building is
necessary to good expression, comes before it, and is to be primarily
looked for: and the more, because the manner of building is capable of
being determinately estimated and classed; but the expressional
character not so: we can at once determine the true value of technical
qualities, we can only approximate to the value of expressional
qualities: and besides this, the looking for the technical qualities
first will enable us to cast a large quantity of rubbish aside at once,
and so to narrow the difficult field of inquiry into expression: we
shall get rid of Chinese pagodas and Indian temples, and Renaissance
Palladianisms, and Alhambra stucco and filigree, in one great rubbish
heap; and shall not need to trouble ourselves about their expression, or
anything else concerning them.Then taking the buildings which have been
rightly put together, and which show common sense in their structure, we
may look for their farther and higher excellences; but on those which
are absurd in their first steps we need waste no time.I could have wished, before writing this chapter, to have given more
study to the difficult subject of the strength of shafts of different
materials and structure; but I cannot enter into every inquiry which
general criticism might suggest, and this I believe to be one which
would have occupied the reader with less profit than many others: all
that is necessary for him to note is, that the great increase of
strength gained by a tubular form in iron shafts, of given solid
contents, is no contradiction to the general principle stated in the
text, that the strength of materials is most available when they are
most concentrated.The strength of the tube is owing to certain
properties of the arch formed by its sides, not to the dispersion of its
materials: and the principle is altogether inapplicable to stone shafts.No one would think of building a pillar of a succession of sandstone
rings; however strong it might be, it would be still stronger filled up,
and the substitution of such a pillar for a solid one of the same
contents would lose too much space; for a stone pillar, even when solid,
must be quite as thick as is either graceful or convenient, and in
modern churches is often too thick as it is, hindering sight of the
preacher, and checking the sound of his voice.Some three months ago, and long after the writing of this passage, I met
accidentally with Mr.If I had cared about the reputation of originality, I should have
been annoyed--and was so, at first, on finding Mr.Garbett's
illustrations of the subject exactly the same as mine, even to the
choice of the elephant's foot for the parallel of the Doric pillar: I
even thought of omitting, or rewriting, great part of the chapter, but
determined at last to let it stand.I am striving to speak plain truths
on many simple and trite subjects, and I hope, therefore, that much of
what I say has been said before, and am quite willing to give up all
claim to originality in any reasoning or assertion whatsoever, if any
one cares to dispute it.I desire the reader to accept what I say, not
as mine, but as the truth, which may be all the world's, if they look
for it.Frank Howard promised at some
discussion respecting the "Seven Lamps," reported in the "Builder," to
pluck all my borrowed feathers off me; but I did not see the end of the
discussion, and do not know to this day how many feathers I have left:
at all events the elephant's foot must belong to Mr.Garbett, though,
strictly speaking, neither he nor I can be quite justified in using it,
for an elephant in reality stands on tiptoe; and this is by no means the
expression of a Doric shaft.As, however, I have been obliged to speak
of this treatise of Mr.Garbett's, and desire also to recommend it as of
much interest and utility in its statements of fact, it is impossible
for me to pass altogether without notice, as if unanswerable, several
passages in which the writer has objected to views stated in the "Seven
Lamps."I should at any rate have noticed the passage quoted above,
(Chap.30th,) which runs counter to the spirit of all I have ever
written, though without referring to me; but the references to the
"Seven Lamps" I should not have answered, unless I had desired,
generally, to recommend the book, and partly also, because they may
serve as examples of the kind of animadversion which the "Seven Lamps"
had to sustain from architects, very generally; which examples being
once answered, there will be little occasion for my referring in future
to other criticisms of the kind.The first reference to the "Seven Lamps" is in the second page, where
Mr.Garbett asks a question, "Why are not convenience and stability
enough to constitute a fine building?"--which I should have answered
shortly by asking another, "Why we have been made men, and not bees nor
termites:" but Mr.Garbett has given a very pretty, though partial,
answer to it himself, in his 4th to 9th pages,--an answer which I
heartily beg the reader to consider.But, in page 12, it is made a grave
charge against me, that I use the words beauty and ornament
interchangeably.I do so, and ever shall; and so, I believe, one day,
will Mr.Garbett himself; but not while he continues to head his pages
thus:--"Beauty not dependent on ornament, _or superfluous_ features."What right has he to assume that ornament, rightly so called, ever was,
or can be, superfluous?I have said before, and repeatedly in other
places, that the most beautiful things are the most useless; I never
said superfluous.I said useless in the well-understood and usual sense,
as meaning, inapplicable to the service of the body.Thus I called
peacocks and lilies useless; meaning, that roast peacock was unwholesome
(taking Juvenal's word for it), and that dried lilies made bad hay: but
I do not think peacocks superfluous birds, nor that the world could get
on well without its lilies.Or, to look closer, I suppose the peacock's
blue eyes to be very useless to him; not dangerous indeed, as to their
first master, but of small service, yet I do not think there is a
superfluous eye in all his tail; and for lilies, though the great King
of Israel was not "arrayed" like one of them, can Mr.Garbett tell us
which are their superfluous leaves?Is there no Diogenes among lilies?none to be found content to drink dew, but out of silver?The fact is, I
never met with the architect yet who did not think ornament meant a
thing to be bought in a shop and pinned on, or left off, at
architectural toilets, as the fancy seized them, thinking little more
than many women do of the other kind of ornament--the only true
kind,--St.Peter's kind,--"Not that outward adorning, but the inner--of
the heart."I do not mean that architects cannot conceive this better
ornament, but they do not understand that it is the _only_ ornament;
that _all_ architectural ornament is this, and nothing but this; that a
noble building never has any extraneous or superfluous ornament; that
all its parts are necessary to its loveliness, and that no single atom
of them could be removed without harm to its life.You do not build a
temple and then dress it.[101] You create it in its loveliness, and
leave it, as her Maker left Eve.Not unadorned, I believe, but so well
adorned as to need no feather crowns.And I use the words ornament and
beauty interchangeably, in order that architects may understand this: I
assume that their building is to be a perfect creature capable of
nothing less than it has, and needing nothing more.It may, indeed,
receive additional decoration afterwards, exactly as a woman may
gracefully put a bracelet on her arm, or set a flower in her hair: but
that additional decoration is _not_ the _architecture_.It is of
curtains, pictures, statues, things that may be taken away from the
building, and not hurt it.He
has only to do with what is part of the building itself, that is to say,
its own inherent beauty.Garbett does not understand or
acknowledge this, he is led on from error to error; for we next find him
endeavoring to define beauty as distinct from ornament, and saying that
"Positive beauty may be produced by a studious collation of whatever
will display design, order, and congruity."There
is a highly studious collation of whatever will display design, order,
and congruity, in a skull, is there not?--yet small beauty.The nose is
a decorative feature,--yet slightly necessary to beauty, it seems to me;
now, at least, for I once thought I must be wrong in considering a skull
disagreeable.I gave it fair trial: put one on my bed-room
chimney-piece, and looked at it by sunrise every morning, and by
moonlight every night, and by all the best lights I could think of, for
a month, in vain.I found it as ugly at last as I did at first.So,
also, the hair is a decoration, and its natural curl is of little use;
but can Mr.Garbett conceive a bald beauty; or does he prefer a wig,
because that is a "_studious_ collation" of whatever will produce
design, order, and congruity?So the flush of the cheek is a
decoration,--God's painting of the temple of his spirit,--and the
redness of the lip; and yet poor Viola thought it beauty truly blent;
and I hold with her.The second point questioned is my assertion, "Ornament cannot be
overcharged if it is good, and is always overcharged when it is bad."Garbett objects in these terms: "I must contend, on the
contrary, that the very best ornament may be overcharged by being
misplaced."Garbett cannot get rid of his unfortunate notion that
ornament is a thing to be manufactured separately, and fastened on.He
supposes that an ornament may be called good in itself, in the
stonemason's yard or in the ironmonger's shop: Once for all, let him put
this idea out of his head.We may say of a thing, considered separately,
that it is a pretty thing; but before we can say it is a good ornament,
we must know what it is to adorn, and how.As, for instance, a ring of
gold is a pretty thing; it is a good ornament on a woman's finger; not a
good ornament hung through her under lip.A hollyhock, seven feet high,
would be a good ornament for a cottage-garden; not a good ornament for a
lady's head-dress.Garbett have seen this without my
showing?and that, therefore, when I said "_good_" ornament, I said
"well-placed" ornament, in one word, and that, also, when Mr.Garbett
says "it may be overcharged by being misplaced," he merely says it may
be overcharged by being _bad_.But, granted that ornament _were_ independent of its position,
and might be pronounced good in a separate form, as books are good, or
men are good.--Suppose I had written to a student in Oxford, "You cannot
have too many books, if they be good books;" and he had answered me,
"Yes, for if I have many, I have no place to put them in but the
coal-cellar."Would that in anywise affect the general principle that
he could not have too many books?Or suppose he had written, "I must not have too many, they confuse my
head."I should have written back to him: "Don't buy books to put in the
coal-hole, nor read them if they confuse your head; you cannot have too
many, if they be good: but if you are too lazy to take care of them, or
too dull to profit by them, you are better without them."Exactly in the same tone, I repeat to Mr.Garbett, "You cannot have too
much ornament, if it be good: but if you are too indolent to arrange it,
or too dull to take advantage of it, assuredly you are better without
it."The other points bearing on this question have already been stated in
the close of the 21st chapter.The third reference I have to answer, is to my repeated assertion, that
the evidence of manual labor is one of the chief sources of value in
ornament, ("Seven Lamps," p.III.,)
to which objection is made in these terms: "We must here warn the reader
against a remarkable error of Ruskin.The value of ornaments in
architecture depends _not in the slightest degree_ on the _manual labor_
they contain.If it did, the finest ornaments ever executed would be the
stone chains that hang before certain Indian rock-temples.""The value of the Cornish mines depends not in
the slightest degree on the quantity of copper they contain.If it did,
the most valuable things ever produced would be copper saucepans."It is
hardly worth my while to answer this; but, lest any of my readers should
be confused by the objection, and as I hold the fact to be of great
importance, I may re-state it for them with some explanation.Observe, then, the appearance of labor, that is to say, the evidence of
the past industry of man, is always, in the abstract, intensely
delightful: man being meant to labor, it is delightful to see that he
_has_ labored, and to read the record of his active and worthy
existence.The evidence of labor becomes painful only when it is a _sign of Evil
greater, as Evil, than the labor is great, as Good_.As, for instance,
if a man has labored for an hour at what might have been done by another
man in a moment, this evidence of his labor is also evidence of his
weakness; and this weakness is greater in rank of evil, than his
industry is great in rank of good.Again, if a man have labored at what was not worth accomplishing, the
signs of his labor are the signs of his folly, and his folly dishonors
his industry; we had rather he had been a wise man in rest than a fool
in labor.Again, if a man have labored without accomplishing anything, the signs
of his labor are the signs of his disappointment; and we have more
sorrow in sympathy with his failure, than pleasure in sympathy with his
work.Now, therefore, in ornament, whenever labor replaces what was better
than labor, that is to say, skill and thought; wherever it substitutes
itself for these, or _negatives these by its existence_, then it is
positive evil.Copper is an evil when it alloys gold, or poisons food:
not an evil, as copper; good in the form of pence, seriously
objectionable when it occupies the room of guineas.Let Danae cast it
out of her lap, when the gold comes from heaven; but let the poor man
gather it up carefully from the earth.Farther, the evidence of labor is not only a good when added to other
good, but the utter absence of it destroys good in human work.It is
only good for God to create without toil; that which man can create
without toil is worthless: machine ornaments are no ornaments at all.Consider this carefully, reader: I could illustrate it for you
endlessly; but you feel it yourself every hour of your existence.And if
you do not know that you feel it, take up, for a little time, the trade
which of all manual trades has been most honored: be for once a
carpenter.Make for yourself a table or a chair, and see if you ever
thought any table or chair so delightful, and what strange beauty there
will be in their crooked limbs.I have not noticed any other animadversions on the "Seven Lamps" in Mr.Garbett's volume; but if there be more, I must now leave it to his own
consideration, whether he may not, as in the above instances, have made
them incautiously: I may, perhaps, also be permitted to request other
architects, who may happen to glance at the preceding pages, not
immediately to condemn what may appear to them false in general
principle.I must often be found deficient in technical knowledge; I
may often err in my statements respecting matters of practice or of
special law.But I do not write thoughtlessly respecting principles; and
my statements of these will generally be found worth reconnoitring
before attacking.Architects, no doubt, fancy they have strong grounds
for supposing me wrong when they seek to invalidate my assertions.Let
me assure them, at least, that I mean to be their friend, although they
may not immediately recognise me as such.If I could obtain the public
ear, and the principles I have advocated were carried into general
practice, porphyry and serpentine would be given to them instead of
limestone and brick; instead of tavern and shop-fronts they would have
to build goodly churches and noble dwelling-houses; and for every
stunted Grecism and stucco Romanism, into which they are now forced to
shape their palsied thoughts, and to whose crumbling plagiarisms they
must trust their doubtful fame, they would be asked to raise whole
streets of bold, and rich, and living architecture, with the certainty
in their hearts of doing what was honorable to themselves, and good for
all men.Before I altogether leave the question of the influence of labor on
architectural effect, the reader may expect from me a word or two
respecting the subject which this year must be interesting to all--the
applicability, namely, of glass and iron to architecture in general, as
in some sort exemplified by the Crystal Palace.It is thought by many that we shall forthwith have great part of our
architecture in glass and iron, and that new forms of beauty will result
from the studied employment of these materials.It may be told in a few words how far this is possible; how far
eternally impossible.There are two means of delight in all productions of art--color and
form.The most vivid conditions of color attainable by human art are those of
works in glass and enamel, but not the most perfect.The best and
noblest coloring possible to art is that attained by the touch of the
human hand on an opaque surface, upon which it can command any tint
required, without subjection to alteration by fire or other mechanical
means.No color is so noble as the color of a good painting on canvas or
gesso.This kind of color being, however, impossible, for the most part, in
architecture, the next best is the scientific disposition of the natural
colors of stones, which are far nobler than any abstract hues producible
by human art.The delight which we receive from glass painting is one altogether
inferior, and in which we should degrade ourselves by over indulgence.Nevertheless, it is possible that we may raise some palaces like
Aladdin's with  glass for jewels, which shall be new in the annals
of human splendor, and good in their place; but not if they superseded
nobler edifices.Now, color is producible either on opaque or in transparent bodies: but
form is only expressible, in its perfection, on opaque bodies, without
lustre.This law is imperative, universal, irrevocable.No perfect or refined
form can be expressed except in opaque and lustreless matter.You cannot
see the form of a jewel, nor, in any perfection, even of a cameo or
bronze.You cannot perfectly see the form of a humming-bird, on account
of its burnishing; but you can see the form of a swan perfectly.No noble
work in form can ever, therefore, be produced in transparent or lustrous
glass or enamel.All noble architecture depends for its majesty on its
form: therefore you can never have any noble architecture in transparent
or lustrous glass or enamel.Iron is, however, opaque; and both it and
opaque enamel may, perhaps, be rendered quite lustreless; and, therefore,
fit to receive noble form.Let this be thoroughly done, and both the iron and enamel made fine in
paste or grain, and you may have an architecture as noble as cast or
struck architecture even can be: as noble, therefore, as coins can be, or
common cast bronzes, and such other multiplicable things;[102]--eternally
separated from all good and great things by a gulph which not all the
tubular bridges nor engineering of ten thousand nineteenth centuries cast
into one great bronze-foreheaded century, will ever overpass one inch of.All art which is worth its room in this world, all art which is not a
piece of blundering refuse, occupying the foot or two of earth which, if
unencumbered by it, would have grown corn or violets, or some better
thing, is _art which proceeds from an individual mind, working through
instruments which assist, but do not supersede, the muscular action of
the human hand, upon the materials which most tenderly receive, and most
securely retain, the impressions of such human labor_.And the value of every work of art is exactly in the ratio of the
quantity of humanity which has been put into it, and legibly expressed
upon it for ever:--

First, of thought and moral purpose;

Secondly, of technical skill;

Thirdly, of bodily industry.The quantity of bodily industry which that Crystal Palace expresses is
very great.The quantity of thought it expresses is, I suppose, a single and very
admirable thought of Mr.Paxton's, probably not a bit brighter than
thousands of thoughts which pass through his active and intelligent
brain every hour,--that it might be possible to build a greenhouse
larger than ever greenhouse was built before.This thought, and some
very ordinary algebra, are as much as all that glass can represent of
human intellect."But one poor half-pennyworth of bread to all this
intolerable deal of sack.""The earth hath bubbles as the water hath:
   And this is of them."The depth of the cutting in some of the early English capitals is,
indeed, part of a general system of attempts at exaggerated force of
effect, like the "_black_ touches" of second-rate draughtsmen, which I
have noticed as characteristic of nearly all northern work, associated
with the love of the grotesque: but the main section of the capital is
indeed a dripstone rolled round, as above described; and dripstone
sections are continually found in northern work, where not only they
cannot increase force of effect, but are entirely invisible except on
close examination; as, for instance, under the uppermost range of stones
of the foundation of Whitehall, or under the <DW72> of the restored base
of All Souls College, Oxford, under the level of the eye.I much doubt
if any of the Fellows be aware of its existence.Many readers will be surprised and displeased by the disparagement of
the early English capital.That capital has, indeed, one character of
considerable value; namely, the boldness with which it stops the
mouldings which fall upon it, and severs them from the shaft,
contrasting itself with the multiplicity of their vertical lines.Sparingly used, or seldom seen, it is thus, in its place, not
unpleasing; and we English love it from association, it being always
found in connection with our purest and loveliest Gothic arches, and
never in multitudes large enough to satiate the eye with its form.The
reader who sits in the Temple church every Sunday, and sees no
architecture during the week but that of Chancery Lane, may most
justifiably quarrel with me for what I have said of it.But if every
house in Fleet Street or Chancery Lane were Gothic, and all had early
English capitals, I would answer for his making peace with me in a
fortnight.Whose they are, is of little consequence to the reader or to me, and I
have taken no pains to discover; their value being not in any evidence
they bear respecting dates, but in their intrinsic merit as examples of
composition.Two of them are within the gate, one on the top of it, and
this latter is on the whole the best, though all are beautiful; uniting
the intense northern energy in their figure sculpture with the most
serene classical restraint in their outlines, and unaffected, but
masculine simplicity of construction.I have not put letters to the diagram of the lateral arch at page 154,
in order not to interfere with the clearness of the curves, but I shall
always express the same points by the same letters, whenever I have to
give measures of arches of this simple kind, so that the reader need
never have the diagrams lettered at all.The base or span of the centre
arch will always be _a b_; its vertex will always be V; the points of
the cusps will be _c c_; _p p_ will be the bases of perpendiculars let
fall from V and _c_ on _a b_; and _d_ the base of a perpendicular from
the point of the cusp to the arch line.Then _a b_ will always be a span
of the arch, V _p_ its perpendicular height, V _a_ the chord of its side
arcs, _d c_ the depth of its cusps, _c c_ the horizontal interval
between the cusps, _a c_ the length of the chord of the lower arc of the
cusp, V _c_ the length of the chord of the upper arc of the cusp,
(whether continuous or not,) and _c p_ the length of a perpendicular
from the point of the cusp on _a b_.Of course we do not want all these measures for a single arch, but it
often happens that some of them are attainable more easily than others;
some are often unattainable altogether, and it is necessary therefore to
have expressions for whichever we may be able to determine.V _p_ or V _a_, _a b_, and _d c_ are always essential; then either _a c_
and V _c_ or _c c_ and _c p_: when I have my choice, I always take _a
b_, V _p_, _d c_, _c c_, and _c p_, but _c p_ is not to be generally
obtained so accurately as the cusp arcs.The measures of the present arch are:

           Ft._a b_,    3,, 8
  V _p_,    4,, 0
  V _c_,    2,, 4-1/2
  _a c_,    2,, 0-1/4
  _d c_,    0,, 3-1/2


                   20.SHAFTS OF DUCAL PALACE.The shortness of the thicker ones at the angles is induced by the
greater depth of the enlarged capitals: thus the 36th shaft is 10 ft.in circumference at its base, and 10,, 0-1/2[103] in
circumference under the fillet of its capital; but it is only 6,,
1-3/4 high, while the minor intermediate shafts, of which the thickest
is 7,, 8 round at the base, and 7,, 4 under capital, are yet on the
average 7,, 7 high.The angle shaft towards the sea (the 18th) is
nearly of the proportions of the 36th, and there are three others, the
15th, 24th, and 26th, which are thicker than the rest, though not so
thick as the angle ones.The 24th and 26th have both party walls to
bear, and I imagine the 15th must in old time have carried another,
reaching across what is now the Sala del Gran Consiglio.They measure respectively round at the base,

  The 15th, 8,, 2
      24th, 9,, 6-1/2
      26th, 8,, 0-1/2

The other pillars towards the sea, and those to the 27th inclusive of
the Piazzetta, are all seven feet round at the base, and then there is a
most curious and delicate crescendo of circumference to the 36th, thus:

  The 28th, 7,, 3   The 33rd, 7,, 6
      29th, 7,, 4       34th, 7,, 8
      30th, 7,, 6       35th, 7,, 8
      31st, 7,, 7       36th, 10,, 4-1/3
      32nd, 7,, 5

The shafts of the upper arcade, which are above these thicker columns,
are also thicker than their companions, measuring on the average, 4,,
8-1/2 in circumference, while those of the sea facade, except the 29th,
average 4,, 7-1/2 in circumference.The 29th, which is of course above
the 15th of the lower story, is 5,, 5 in circumference, which little
piece of evidence will be of no small value to us by-and-by.The 35th
carries the angle of the palace, and is 6,, 0 round.The 47th, which
comes above the 24th and carries the party wall of the Sala del Gran
Consiglio, is strengthened by a pilaster; and the 51st, which comes over
the 26th, is 5,, 4-1/2 round, or nearly the same as the 29th; it
carries the party wall of the Sala del Scrutinio; a small room
containing part of St.Mark's library, coming between the two saloons;
a room which, in remembrances of the help I have received in all my
inquiries from the kindness and intelligence of its usual occupant, I
shall never easily distinguish otherwise than as "Mr."[104]

I may as well connect with these notes respecting the arcades of the
Ducal Palace, those which refer to Plate XIV., which represents one of
its spandrils.Every spandril of the lower arcade was intended to have
been occupied by an ornament resembling the one given in that plate.The
mass of the building being of Istrian stone, a depth of about two inches
is left within the mouldings of the arches, rough hewn, to receive the
slabs of fine marble composing the patterns.I cannot say whether the
design was ever completed, or the marbles have been since removed, but
there are now only two spandrils retaining their fillings, and vestiges
of them in a third.The two complete spandrils are on the sea facade,
above the 3rd and 10th capitals (_vide_ method of numbering, Chap.I.,
page 30); that is to say, connecting the 2nd arch with the 3rd, and the
9th with the 10th.The latter is the one given in Plate XIV.The white
portions of it are all white marble, the dental band surrounding the
circle is in coarse sugary marble, which I believe to be Greek, and
never found in Venice to my recollection, except in work at least
anterior to the fifteenth century.The shaded fields charged with the
three white triangles are of red Verona marble; the inner disc is green
serpentine, and the dark pieces of the radiating leaves are grey marble.The two uppermost are 1,, 5 each
side, and the lower 1,, 2.The extreme diameter of the circle is 3,, 10-1/2; its field is slightly
raised above the red marbles, as shown in the section at A, on the left.A _a_ is part of the red marble field; _a b_ the section of the dentil
moulding let into it; _b c_ the entire breadth of the rayed zone,
represented on the other side of the spandril by the line C _f_; _c d_
is the white marble band let in, with the dogtooth on the face of it;
_b c_ is 7-3/4 inches across; _c d_ 3-3/4; and at B are given two joints
of the dentil (mentioned above, in the chapter on dentils, as unique in
Venice) of their actual size.At C is given one of the inlaid leaves;
its measure being (in inches) C _f_ 7-3/4; C _h_ 3/4; _f g_ 3/4; _f e_
4-3/4, the base of the smaller leaves being of course _f e_ - _f g_ = 4.The pattern which occupies the other spandril is similar, except that
the field _b c_, instead of the intersecting arcs, has only triangles of
grey marble, arranged like rays, with their bases towards the centre.There being twenty round the circle, the reader can of course draw them
for himself; they being isosceles, touching the dentil with their
points, and being in contact at their bases: it has lost its central
boss.The marbles are, in both, covered with a rusty coating, through
which it is excessively difficult to distinguish the colors (another
proof of the age of the ornament).But the white marbles are certainly,
in places (except only the sugary dentil), veined with purple, and the
grey seem warmed with green.A trace of another of these ornaments may be seen over the 21st capital;
but I doubt if the marbles have ever been inserted in the other
spandrils, and their want of ornament occasions the slight meagreness in
the effect of the lower story, which is almost the only fault of the
building.This decoration by discs, or shield-like ornaments, is a marked
characteristic of Venetian architecture in its earlier ages, and is
carried into later times by the Byzantine Renaissance, already
distinguished from the more corrupt forms of Renaissance, in Appendix 6.Of the disc decoration, so borrowed, we have already an example in Plate
I. In Plate VII.we have an earlier condition of it, one of the discs
being there sculptured, the others surrounded by sculptured bands: here
we have, on the Ducal Palace, the most characteristic of all, because
likest to the shield, which was probably the origin of the same ornament
among the Arabs, and assuredly among the Greeks.Donaldson's
restoration of the gate of the treasury of Atreus, this ornament is
conjecturally employed, and it occurs constantly on the Arabian
buildings of Cairo.ANCIENT REPRESENTATIONS OF WATER.I have long been desirous of devoting some time to an enquiry into the
effect of natural scenery upon the pagan, and especially the Greek,
mind, and knowing that my friend, Mr.C. Newton, had devoted much
thought to the elucidation of the figurative and symbolic language of
ancient art, I asked him to draw up for me a few notes of the facts
which he considered most interesting, as illustrative of its methods of
representing nature.I suggested to him, for an initiative subject, the
representation of water; because this is one of the natural objects
whose portraiture may most easily be made a test of treatment, for it is
one of universal interest, and of more closely similar aspect in all
parts of the world than any other.Waves, currents, and eddies are much
liker each other, everywhere, than either land or vegetation.Rivers and
lakes, indeed, differ widely from the sea, and the clear Pacific from
the angry Northern ocean; but the Nile is liker the Danube than a knot
of Nubian palms is to a glade of the Black Forest; and the Mediterranean
is liker the Atlantic than the Campo Felice is like Solway moss.Newton has accordingly most kindly furnished me with the following
data.One or two of the types which he describes have been already
noticed in the main text; but it is well that the reader should again
contemplate them in the position which they here occupy in a general
system.Newton's definitions of
the terms "figurative" and "symbolic," as applied to art, in the
beginning of the paper.*       *       *       *       *

In ancient art, that is to say, in the art of the Egyptian, Assyrian,
Greek, and Roman races, water is, for the most part, represented
conventionally rather than naturally.By natural representation is here meant as just and perfect an imitation
of nature as the technical means of art will allow: on the other hand,
representation is said to be conventional, either when a confessedly
inadequate imitation is accepted in default of a better, or when
imitation is not attempted at all, and it is agreed that other modes of
representation, those by figures or by symbols, shall be its substitute
and equivalent.In figurative representation there is always _impersonation_; the
sensible form, borrowed by the artist from organic life, is conceived to
be actuated by a will, and invested with such mental attributes as
constitute personality.The sensible _symbol_, whether borrowed from organic or from inorganic
nature, is not a personification at all, but the conventional sign or
equivalent of some object or notion, to which it may perhaps bear no
visible resemblance, but with which the intellect or the imagination has
in some way associated it.For instance, a city may be figuratively represented as a woman crowned
with towers; here the artist has selected for the expression of his idea
a human form animated with a will and motives of action analogous to
those of humanity generally.Or, again, as in Greek art, a bull may be a
figurative representation of a river, and, in the conception of the
artist, this animal form may contain, and be ennobled by, a human mind.This is still impersonation; the form only in which personality is
embodied is changed.Again, a dolphin may be used as a symbol of the sea; a man ploughing
with two oxen is a well-known symbol of a Roman colony.In neither of
these instances is there impersonation.The dolphin is not invested,
like the figure of Neptune, with any of the attributes of the human
mind; it has animal instincts, but no will; it represents to us its
native element, only as a part may be taken for a whole.Again, the man ploughing does not, like the turreted female figure,
_personify_, but rather _typifies_ the town, standing as the visible
representation of a real event, its first foundation.To our mental
perceptions, as to our bodily senses, this figure seems no more than
man; there is no blending of his personal nature with the impersonal
nature of the colony, no transfer of attributes from the one to the
other.Though the conventionally imitative, the figurative, and the symbolic,
are three distinct kinds of representation, they are constantly combined
in one composition, as we shall see in the following examples, cited
from the art of successive races in chronological order.In Egyptian art the general representation of water is the
conventionally imitative.In the British Museum are two frescoes from
tombs at Thebes, Nos.177 and 170: the subject of the first of these is
an oblong pond, ground-plan and elevation being strangely confused in
the design.In this pond water is represented by parallel zigzag lines,
in which fish are swimming about.On the surface are birds and lotos
flowers; the herbage at the edge of the pond is represented by a border
of symmetrical fan-shaped flowers; the field beyond by rows of trees,
arranged round the sides of the pond at right angles to each other, and
in defiance of all laws of perspective.170, we have the representation of a river with
papyrus on its bank.Here the water is rendered by zigzag lines arranged
vertically and in parallel lines, so as to resemble herring-bone
masonry, thus.There are fish in this fresco as in the preceding, and in
both each fish is drawn very distinctly, not as it would appear to the
eye viewed through water.The mode of representing this element in
Egyptian painting is further abbreviated in their hieroglyphic writing,
where the sign of water is a zigzag line; this line is, so to speak, a
picture of water written in short hand.In the Egyptian Pantheon there
was but one aquatic deity, the god of the Nile; his type is, therefore,
the only figurative representation of water in Egyptian art.(Birch,
"Gallery of British Museum Antiquities," Pl.In Assyrian sculpture
we have very curious conventionally imitative representations of water.On several of the friezes from Nimroud and Khorsabad, men are seen
crossing a river in boats, or in skins, accompanied by horses swimming
(see Layard, ii.In these scenes water is represented by masses
of wavy lines somewhat resembling tresses of hair, and terminating in
curls or volutes; these wavy lines express the general character of a
deep and rapid current, like that of the Tigris.Fish are but sparingly
introduced, the idea of surface being sufficiently expressed by the
floating figures and boats.In the representation of these there is the
same want of perspective as in the Egyptian fresco which we have just
cited.In the Assyrian Pantheon one aquatic deity has been discovered, the god
Dagon, whose human form terminates in a fish's tail.Of the character
and attributes of this deity we know but little.The more abbreviated mode of representing water, the zigzag line, occurs
on the large silver coins with the type of a city or a war galley (see
Layard, ii.These coins were probably struck in Assyria, not
long after the conquest of it by the Persians.In Greek art the modes of representing water are far more varied.Two
conventional imitations, the wave moulding and the Maeander, are well
known.Both are probably of the most remote antiquity; both have been
largely employed as an architectural ornament, and subordinately as a
decoration of vases, costume, furniture and implements.In the wave
moulding we have a conventional representation of the small crisping
waves which break upon the shore of the Mediterranean, the sea of the
Greeks.Their regular succession, and equality of force and volume, are
generalised in this moulding, while the minuter varieties which
distinguish one wave from another are merged in the general type.The
character of ocean waves is to be "for ever changing, yet the same for
ever;" it is this eternity of recurrence which the early artist has
expressed in this hieroglyphic.With this profile representation of water may be compared the sculptured
waves out of which the head and arms of Hyperion are rising in the
pediment of the Parthenon (Elgin Room, No.(65) 91, Museum Marbles, vi.Phidias has represented these waves like a mass of overlapping
tiles, thus generalising their rippling movement.In the Maeander pattern
the graceful curves of nature are represented by angles, as in the
Egyptian hieroglyphic of water: so again the earliest representation of
the labyrinth on the coins of the Cnossus is rectangular; on later coins
we find the curvilinear form introduced.In the language of Greek mythography, the wave pattern and the Maeander
are sometimes used singly for the idea of water, but more frequently
combined with figurative representation.The number of aquatic deities
in the Greek Pantheon led to the invention of a great variety of
beautiful types.Everybody is
familiar with the general form of Poseidon (Neptune), the Nereids, the
Nymphs and River Gods; but the modes in which these types were combined
with conventional imitation and with accessory symbols deserve careful
study, if we would appreciate the surpassing richness and beauty of the
language of art formed out of these elements.This class of representations may be divided into two principal groups,
those relating to the sea, and those relating to fresh water.The power of the ocean and the great features of marine scenery are
embodied in such types as Poseidon, Nereus and the Nereids, that is to
say, in human forms moving through the liquid element in chariots, or on
the back of dolphins, or who combine the human form with that of the
fish-like Tritons.The sea-monsters who draw these chariots are called
Hippocamps, being composed of the tail of a fish and the fore-part of a
horse, the legs terminating in web-feet: this union seems to express
speed and power under perfect control, such as would characterise the
movements of sea deities.A few examples have been here selected to show
how these types were combined with symbols and conventional imitation.In the British Museum is a vase, No.1257, engraved (Lenormant et De
Witte, Mon.27), of which the subject is, Europa crossing
the sea on the back of the bull.In this design the sea is represented
by a variety of expedients.First, the swimming action of the bull
suggests the idea of the liquid medium through which he moves.Behind
him stands Nereus, his staff held perpendicularly in his hand; the top
of his staff comes nearly to the level of the bull's back, and is
probably meant as the measure of the whole depth of the sea.Towards the
surface line thus indicated a dolphin is rising; in the middle depth is
another dolphin; below a shrimp and a cuttle-fish, and the bottom is
indicated by a jagged line of rocks, on which are two echini.On a mosaic found at Oudnah in Algeria (Revue Archeol., iii.50), we
have a representation of the sea, remarkable for the fulness of details
with which it is made out.This, though of the Roman period, is so thoroughly Greek in feeling,
that it may be cited as an example of the class of mythography now under
consideration.The mosaic lines the floor and sides of a bath, and, as
was commonly the case in the baths of the ancients, serves as a
figurative representation of the water it contained.On the sides are hippocamps, figures riding on dolphins, and islands on
which fishermen stand; on the floor are fish, crabs, and shrimps.These, as in the vase with Europa, indicate the bottom of the sea: the
same symbols of the submarine world appear on many other ancient
designs.Thus in vase pictures, when Poseidon upheaves the island of Cos
to overwhelm the Giant Polydotes, the island is represented as an
immense mass of rock; the parts which have been under water are
indicated by a dolphin, a shrimp, and a sepia, the parts above the water
by a goat and a serpent (Lenormant et De Witte, i., tav.Sometimes these symbols occur singly in Greek art, as the types, for
instance, of coins.In such cases they cannot be interpreted without
being viewed in relation to the whole context of mythography to which
they belong.If we find, for example, on one coin of Tarentum a shell,
on another a dolphin, on a third a figure of Tarus, the mythic founder
of the town, riding on a dolphin in the midst of the waves, and this
latter group expresses the idea of the town itself and its position on
the coast, then we know the two former types to be but portions of the
greater design, having been detached from it, as we may detach words
from sentences.The study of the fuller and clearer examples, such as we have cited
above, enables us to explain many more compendious forms of expression.We have, for instance, on coins several representations of ancient
harbors.Of these, the earliest occurs on the coins of Zancle, the modern Messina
in Sicily.The ancients likened the form of this harbor to a sickle, and
on the coins of the town we find a curved object, within the area of
which is a dolphin.On this curve are four square elevations placed at
equal distances.It has been conjectured that these projections are
either towers or the large stones to which galleys were moored still to
be seen in ancient harbors (see Burgon, Numismatic Chronicle, iii.With this archaic representation of a harbor may be compared some
examples of the Roman period.Severus struck at
Corinth (Millingen, Sylloge of Uned.30) we have a female figure standing on a rock between two recumbent
male figures holding rudders.From an arch at the foot of the rock a
stream is flowing: this is a representation of the rock of the Acropolis
of Corinth: the female figure is a statue of Aphrodite, whose temple
surmounted the rock.The two
recumbent figures are impersonations of the two harbors, Lechreum and
Cenchreia, between which Corinth was situated.16) describes a similar picture of the Isthmus between the two
harbors, one of which was in the form of a youth, the other of a nymph.On another coin of Corinth we have one of the harbors in a semicircular
form, the whole arc being marked with small equal divisions, to denote
the archways under which the ancient galleys were drawn, _subductae_; at
the either horn or extremity of the harbor is a temple; in the centre of
the mouth, a statue of Neptune.(Millingen, Medailles Ined., Pl.Compare also Millingen, Ancient Coins of Cities and Kings, 1831,
pp.246; and the
harbor of Ostium, on the large brass coins of Nero, in which there is a
representation of the Roman fleet and a reclining figure of Neptune.)In vase pictures we have occasionally an attempt to represent water
naturally.On a vase in the British Museum (No.785), of which the
subject is Ulysses and the Sirens, the Sea is rendered by wavy lines
drawn in black on a red ground, and something like the effect of light
playing on the surface of the water is given.On each side of the ship
are shapeless masses of rock on which the Sirens stand.One of the most beautiful of the figurative representations of the sea
is the well-known type of Scylla.She has a beautiful body, terminating
in two barking dogs and two serpent tails.Sometimes drowning men, the
_rari nantes in gurgite vasto_, appear caught up in the coils of these
tails.Scylla generally brandishes a rudder to show
the manner in which she twists the course of ships.For varieties of her
type see Monum.The representations of fresh water may be arranged under the following
heads--rivers, lakes, fountains.There are several figurative modes of representing rivers very
frequently employed in ancient mythography.In the type which occurs earliest we have the human form combined with
that of the bull in several ways.On an archaic coin of Metapontum in
Lucania, (see frontispiece to Millingen, Ancient Coins of Greek Cities
and Kings,) the river Achelous is represented with the figure of a man
with a shaggy beard and bull's horns and ears.On a vase of the best
period of Greek art (Brit.of
Lit., New Series, Lond.100) the same river is represented
with a satyr's head and long bull's horns on the forehead; his form,
human to the waist, terminates in a fish's tail; his hair falls down his
back; his beard is long and shaggy.In this type we see a combination of
the three forms separately enumerated by Sophocles, in the commencement
of the Trachiniae.[Greek: Acheloon lego,
  os m' en trisin morphaisin exetei patros,
  phoiton enarges auros allot' aiolos,
  drakon heliktos, allot' andreio kytei
  bouproros, ek de daskiou geneiados
  krounoi dierrhainonto krenaiou potou].In a third variety of this type the human-headed body is united at the
waist with the shoulders of a bull's body, in which it terminates.This
occurs on an early vase.On the coins of Oeniadae
in Acarnia, and on those of Ambracia, all of the period after Alexander
the Great, the Achelous has a bull's body, and head with a human face.In this variety of the type the human element is almost absorbed, as in
the first variety cited above, the coin of Metapontum, the bull portion
of the type is only indicated by the addition of the horns and ears to
the human head.On the analogy between these, varieties in the type of
the Achelous and those under which the metamorphoses of the marine
goddess Thetis are represented, see Gerhard, Auserl.It is probable that, in the type of Thetis, of Proteus, and
also of the Achelous, the singular combinations and transformations are
intended to express the changeful nature of the element water.Numerous other examples may be cited, where rivers are represented by
this combination of the bull and human form, which maybe called, for
convenience, the Androtauric type.On the coins of Sicily, of the
archaic and also of the finest period of art, rivers are most usually
represented by a youthful male figure, with small budding horns; the
hair has the lank and matted form which characterises aquatic deities in
Greek mythography.The name of the river is often inscribed round the
head.When the whole figure occurs on the coin, it is always represented
standing, never reclining.The type of the bull on the coins of Sybaris and Thurium, in Magna
Graecia, has been considered, with great probability, a representation of
this kind.On the coins of Sybaris, which are of a very early period,
the head of the bull is turned round; on those of Thurium, he stoops his
head, butting: the first of these actions has been thought to symbolise
the winding course of the river, the second, its headlong current.On
the coins of Thurium, the idea of water is further suggested by the
adjunct of dolphins and other fish in the exergue of the coin.The
ground on which the bull stands is indicated by herbage or pebbles.Two bulls' head occur on the coins
of Sardis, and it has been ingeniously conjectured by Mr.Burgon that
the two rivers of the place are expressed under this type.The representation of river-gods as human figures in a reclining
position, though probably not so much employed in earlier Greek art as
the Androtauric type, is very much more familiar to us, from its
subsequent adoption in Roman mythography.The earliest example we have
of a reclining river-god is in the figure in the Elgin Room commonly
called the Ilissus, but more probably the Cephissus.This occupied one
angle in the western pediment of the Parthenon; the other Athenian
river, the Ilissus, and the fountain Callirrhoe being represented by a
male and female figure in the opposite angle; this group, now destroyed,
is visible in the drawing made by Carrey in 1678.It is probable that the necessities of pedimental composition first led
the artist to place the river-god in a reclining position.The head of
the Ilissus being broken off, we are not sure whether he had bull's
horns, like the Sicilian figures already described.His form is
youthful, in the folds of the drapery behind him there is a flow like
that of waves, but the idea of water is not suggested by any other
symbol.When we compare this figure with that of the Nile (Visconti,
Mus.38), and the figure of the Tiber in the Louvre,
both of which are of the Roman period, we see how in these later types
the artist multiplied symbols and accessories, ingrafting them on the
original simple type of the river-god, as it was conceived by Phidias in
the figure of the Ilissus.The Nile is represented as a colossal bearded
figure reclining.At his side is a cornucopia, full of the vegetable
produce of the Egyptian soil.Round his body are sixteen naked boys, who
represent the sixteen cubits, the height to which the river rose in a
favorable year.The statue is placed on a basement divided into three
compartments, one above another.In the uppermost of these, waves are
flowing over in one great sheet from the side of the river-god.In the
other two compartments are the animals and plants of the river; the
bas-reliefs on this basement are, in fact, a kind of abbreviated
symbolic panorama of the Nile.The Tiber is represented in a very similar manner.On the base are, in
two compartments, scenes taken from the early Roman myths; flocks,
herds, and other objects on the banks of the river.39; Millin, Galerie Mythol., i. p.In the types of the Greek coins of Camarina, we find two interesting
representations of Lakes.On the obverse of one of these we have, within
a circle of the wave pattern, a male head, full face, with dishevelled
hair, and with a dolphin on either side; on the reverse a female figure
sailing on a swan, below which a wave moulding, and above, a dolphin.On another coin the swan type of the reverse is associated with the
youthful head of a river-god, inscribed "Hipparis" on the obverse.On
some smaller coins we have the swan flying over the rippling waves,
which are represented by the wave moulding.When we examine the chart of
Sicily, made by the Admiralty survey, we find marked down at Camarina, a
lake through which the river Hipparis flows.We can hardly doubt that the inhabitants of Camarina represented both
their river and their lakes on their coins.The swan flying over the
waves would represent a lake; the figure associated with it being no
doubt the Aphrodite worshipped at that place: the head, in a circle of
wave pattern, may express that part of the river which flows through the
lake.Fountains are usually represented by a stream of water issuing from a
lion's head in the rock: see a vase (Gerhard, Auserl.), where Hercules stands, receiving a shower-bath from a hot
spring at Thermae in Sicily.On the coins of Syracuse the fountain
Arethusa is represented by a female head seen to the front; the flowing
lines of her dishevelled hair suggest, though they do not directly
imitate, the bubbling action of the fresh-water spring; the sea in which
it rises is symbolized by the dolphins round the head.This type
presents a striking analogy with that of the Camarina head in the circle
of wave pattern described above.These are the principal modes of representing water in Greek
mythography.In the art of the Roman period, the same kind of figurative
and symbolic language is employed, but there is a constant tendency to
multiply accessories and details, as we have shown in the later
representations of harbors and river-gods cited above.In these crowded
compositions the eye is fatigued and distracted by the quantity it has
to examine; the language of art becomes more copious but less terse and
emphatic, and addresses itself to minds far less intelligent than the
refined critics who were the contemporaries of Phidias.Rivers in Roman art are usually represented by reclining male figures,
generally bearded, holding reeds or other plants in their hands, and
leaning on urns from which water is flowing.On the coins of many Syrian
cities, struck in imperial times, the city is represented by a turreted
female figure seated on rocks, and resting her feet on the shoulder of a
youthful male figure, who looks up in her face, stretching out his arms,
and who is sunk in the ground as high as the waist.See Mueller
(Denkmaeler d. A. Kunst, i., taf.220) for a group of this kind
in the Vatican, and several similar designs on coins.On the column of Trajan there occur many rude representations of the
Danube, and other rivers crossed by the Romans in their military
expeditions.The water is imitated by sculptured wavy lines, in which
boats are placed.In one scene (Bartoli, Colonna Trajana, Tav.4) this
rude conventional imitation is combined with a figure.In a recess in
the river bank is a reclining river-god, terminating at the waist.This
is either meant for a statue which was really placed on the bank of the
river, and which therefore marks some particular locality, or we have
here figurative representation blended with conventional imitation.On the column of Antoninus (Bartoli, Colon.15) a storm of
rain is represented by the head of Jupiter Pluvius, who has a vast
outspread beard flowing in long tresses.In the Townley collection, in
the British Museum, is a Roman helmet found at Ribchester in Lancashire,
with a mask or vizor attached.The helmet is richly embossed with
figures in a battle scene; round the brow is a row of turrets; the hair
in the forehead is so treated as to give the idea of waves washing the
base of the turrets.This head is perhaps a figurative representation of
a town girt with fortifications and a moat, near which some great battle
was fought.It is engraved (Vetusta Monum.In the Galeria at Florence is a group in alto relievo (Gori, Inscript.14) of three female figures, one of whom is
certainly Demeter Kourotrophos, or the earth; another, Thetis, or the
sea; the centre of the three seems to represent Aphrodite associated, as
on the coins of Camarina, with the element of fresh water.This figure is seated on a swan, and holds over her head an arched veil.Her hair is bound with reeds; above her veil grows a tall water plant,
and below the swan other water plants, and a stork seated on a _hydria_,
or pitcher, from which water is flowing.The swan, the stork, the water
plants, and the _hydria_ must all be regarded as symbols of fresh water,
the latter emblem being introduced to show that the element is fit for
the use of man.Fountains in Roman art are generally personified as figures of nymphs
reclining with urns, or standing holding before them a large shell.One of the latest representations of water in ancient art is the mosaic
of Palestrina (Barthelemy, in Bartoli, Peint.Antiques) which may be
described as a kind of rude panorama of some district of Upper Egypt, a
bird's-eye view, half man, half picture, in which the details are
neither adjusted to a scale, nor drawn according to perspective, but
crowded together, as they would be in an ancient bas-relief.I do not mean what I have here said of the Inventive power of the Arab
to be understood as in the least applying to the detestable
ornamentation of the Alhambra.[105] The Alhambra is no more
characteristic of Arab work, than Milan Cathedral is of Gothic: it is a
late building, a work of the Spanish dynasty in its last decline, and
its ornamentation is fit for nothing but to be transferred to patterns
of carpets or bindings of books, together with their marbling, and
mottling, and other mechanical recommendations.The Alhambra ornament
has of late been largely used in shop-fronts, to the no small detriment
of Regent Street and Oxford Street.LXXII., be the original angle of the wall.Inscribe
within it a circle, _p_ Q N _p_, of the size of the bead required,
touching A B, A C, in _p_, _p_; join _p_, _p_, and draw B C parallel to
it, touching the circle.Then the lines B C, _p p_ are the limits of the possible chamfers
constructed with curves struck either from centre A, as the line Q _q_,
N _d_, _r u_, _g c_, &c., or from any other point chosen as a centre in
the direction Q A produced: and also of all chamfers in straight lines,
as _a b_, _e f_.There are, of course, an infinite number of chamfers to
be struck between B C and _p p_, from every point in Q A produced to
infinity; thus we have infinity multiplied into infinity to express the
number of possible chamfers of this species, which are peculiarly
Italian chamfers; together with another singly infinite group of the
straight chamfers, _a b_, _e f_, &c., of which the one formed by the
line _a b_, passing through the centre of the circle, is the universal
early Gothic chamfer of Venice.Either on the line A C, or on any other lines A _l_ or A _m_,
radiating from A, any number of centres may be taken, from which, with
any radii not greater than the distance between such points and Q, an
infinite number of curves may be struck, such as _t u_, _r s_, N _n_
(all which are here struck from centres on the line A C).These lines
represent the great class of the northern chamfers, of which the number
is infinity raised to its fourth power, but of which the curve N _n_
(for northern) represents the average condition; the shallower chamfers
of the same group, _r s_, _t u_, &c., occurring often in Italy.The
lines _r u_, _t u_, and _a b_ may be taken approximating to the most
frequent conditions of the southern chamfer.It is evident that the chords of any of these curves will give a
relative group of rectilinear chamfers, occurring both in the North and
South; but the rectilinear chamfers, I think, invariably fall within the
line Q C, and are either parallel with it, or inclined to A C at an
angle greater than A C Q, and often perpendicular to it; but never
inclined to it at an angle less than A C Q.The following extract from my note-book refers also to some features of
late decoration of shafts."The Scuola di San Rocco is one of the most interesting examples of
Renaissance work in Venice.Its fluted pillars are surrounded each by a
wreath, one of vine, another of laurel, another of oak, not indeed
arranged with the fantasticism of early Gothic; but, especially the
laurel, reminding one strongly of the laurel sprays, powerful as well as
beautiful, of Veronese and Tintoret.Their stems are curiously and
richly interlaced--the last vestige of the Byzantine wreathed work--and
the vine-leaves are ribbed on the surfaces, I think, nearly as finely as
those of the Noah,[106] though more injured by time.The capitals are
far the richest Renaissance in Venice, less corrupt and more masculine
in plan, than any other, and truly suggestive of support, though of
course showing the tendency to error in this respect; and finally, at
the angles of the pure Attic bases, on the square plinth, are set
couchant animals; one, an elephant four inches high, very curiously and
cleverly cut, and all these details worked with a spirit, finish, fancy,
and affection quite worthy of the middle ages.But they have all the
marked fault of being utterly detached from the architecture.The
wreaths round the columns look as if they would drop off the next
moment, and the animals at the bases produce exactly the effect of mice
who had got there by accident: one feels them ridiculously diminutive,
and utterly useless."The effect of diminutiveness is, I think, chiefly owing to there being
no other groups of figures near them, to accustom the eye to the
proportion, and to the needless choice of the largest animals,
elephants, bears, and lions, to occupy a position so completely
insignificant, and to be expressed on so contemptible a scale,--not in a
bas-relief or pictorial piece of sculpture, but as independent figures.The whole building is a most curious illustration of the appointed fate
of the Renaissance architects,--to caricature whatever they imitated,
and misapply whatever they learned.ROMANIST DECORATION OF BASES.I have spoken above (Appendix 12) of the way in which the Roman Catholic
priests everywhere suffer their churches to be desecrated.But the worst
instances I ever saw of sacrilege and brutality, daily permitted in the
face of all men, were the uses to which the noble base of St.Mark's was
put, when I was last in Venice.Portions of nearly all cathedrals may be
found abandoned to neglect; but this base of St.Full fronting the western sun--crossing the whole breadth of
St.Mark's Place--the termination of the most noble square in the
world--the centre of the most noble city--its purple marbles were, in
the winter of 1849, the customary _gambling tables_ of the idle children
of Venice; and the parts which flank the Great Entrance, that very
entrance where "Barbarossa flung his mantle off," were the counters of a
common bazaar for children's toys, carts, dolls, and small pewter spoons
and dishes, German caricatures and books of the Opera, mixed with those
of the offices of religion; the caricatures being fastened with twine
round the porphyry shafts of the church.One Sunday, the 24th of
February, 1850, the book-stall being somewhat more richly laid out than
usual, I noted down the titles of a few of the books in the order in
which they lay, and I give them below.The irony conveyed by the
juxtaposition of the three in Italics appears too shrewd to be
accidental; but the fact was actually so.Along the edge of the white plinth were a row of two kinds of books,

  Officium Beatae Virg.M.; and Officium Hebdomadae sanctae, juxta Formam
    Missalis et Breviarii Romani sub Urbano VIII.Behind these lay, side by side, the following:

  Don Desiderio.Dramma Giocoso per Musica.Breve Esposizione della Carattere di vera Religione.On the top of this latter, keeping its leaves open,

  La Figlia del Reggimento._Carteggio di Madama la Marchesa di Pompadour, ossia
     raccolta di Lettere scritte della Medesima._
  _Istruzioni di morale Condotta per le Figlie._
  _Francesca di Rimini.Dramma per Musica._

Then, a little farther on, after a mass of plays:--

  Orazioni a Gesu Nazareno e a Maria addolorata.Semiramide; Melodramma tragico da rappresentarsi nel Gran Teatro
    il Fenice.Modo di orare per l'Acquisto del S. Giubileo, conceduto a tutto il
    Mondo Cattolico da S. S. Gregorio XVI.Le due illustre Rivali, Melodramma in Tre Atti, da rappresentarsi
    nel nuovo Gran Teatro il Fenice.Il Cristiano secondo il Cuore di Gesu, per la Pratica delle sue
    Virtu.Traduzione dell'Idioma Italiana.La chiava Chinese; Commedia del Sig.La Pelarina; Intermezzo de Tre Parti per Musica.Il Cavaliero e la Dama; Commedia in Tre Atti in Prosa.But this being the last piece of
Appendix I have to add to the present volume, I would desire to close
its pages with a question to my readers--a statistical question, which,
I doubt not, is being accurately determined for us all elsewhere, and
which, therefore, it seems to me, our time would not be wasted in
determining for ourselves.There has now been peace between England and the continental powers
about thirty-five years, and during that period the English have visited
the continent at the rate of many thousands a year, staying there, I
suppose, on the average, each two or three months; nor these an inferior
kind of English, but the kind which ought to be the best--the noblest
born, the best taught, the richest in time and money, having more
leisure, knowledge, and power than any other portion of the nation.These, we might suppose, beholding, as they travelled, the condition of
the states in which the Papal religion is professed, and being, at the
same time, the most enlightened section of a great Protestant nation,
would have been animated with some desire to dissipate the Romanist
errors, and to communicate to others the better knowledge which they
possessed themselves.I doubt not but that He who gave peace upon the
earth, and gave it by the hand of England, expected this much of her,
and has watched every one of the millions of her travellers as they
crossed the sea, and kept count for him of his travelling expenses, and
of their distribution, in a manner of which neither the traveller nor
his courier were at all informed.I doubt not, I say, but that such
accounts have been literally kept for all of us, and that a day will
come when they will be made clearly legible to us, and when we shall see
added together, on one side of the account book, a great sum, the
certain portion, whatever it may be, of this thirty-five years'
spendings of the rich English, accounted for in this manner:--

To wooden spoons, nut-crackers, and jewellery, bought at Geneva, and
elsewhere among the Alps, so much; to shell cameos and bits of mosaic
bought at Rome, so much; to coral horns and lava brooches bought at
Naples, so much; to glass beads at Venice, and gold filigree at Genoa,
so much; to pictures, and statues, and ornaments, everywhere, so much;
to avant-couriers and extra post-horses, for show and magnificence, so
much; to great entertainments and good places for seeing sights, so
much; to ball-dresses and general vanities, so much.This, I say, will
be the sum on one side of the book; and on the other will be written:

To the struggling Protestant Churches of France, Switzerland, and
Piedmont, so much.Had we not better do this piece of statistics for ourselves, in time?FOOTNOTES:

  [93] Ed.[95] L'Artiste en Batiments, par Louis Berteaux: Dijon, 1848.My
    printer writes at the side of the page a note, which I insert with
    thanks:--"This is not the first attempt at a French order.The
    writer has a Treatise by Sebastian Le Clerc, a great man in his
    generation, which contains a Roman order, a Spanish order, which the
    inventor appears to think very grand, and a _new_ French order
    nationalised by the Gallic cock crowing and clapping its wings in
    the capital."[96] The lower group in Plate XVII.[97] One of the upper stories is also in Gally Knight's plate
    represented as merely banded, and otherwise plain: it is, in
    reality, covered with as delicate inlaying as the rest.The whole
    front is besides out of proportion, and out of perspective, at once;
    and yet this work is referred to as of authority, by our architects.Well may our architecture fall from its place among the fine arts,
    as it is doing rapidly; nearly all our works of value being devoted
    to the Greek architecture, which is _utterly useless_ to us--or
    worse._One_ most noble book, however, has been dedicated to our
    English abbeys,--Mr.E. Sharpe's "Architectural Parallels"--almost a
    model of what I should like to see done for the Gothic of all
    Europe.[98] Except in the single passage "tell it unto the Church," which
    is simply the _extension_ of what had been commanded before, i.e.,
    tell the fault first "between thee and him," then taking "with thee
    one or two more," then, to all Christian men capable of hearing the
    cause: if he refuse to hear their common voice, "let him be unto
    thee as a heathen man and publican:" (But consider how Christ
    treated both.)[99] One or two remarks on this subject, some of which I had
    intended to have inserted here, and others in Appendix 5, I have
    arranged in more consistent order, and published in a separate
    pamphlet, "Notes on the Construction of Sheep-folds," for the
    convenience of readers interested in other architecture than that of
    Venetian palaces.[100] Not, however, by Johnson's _testimony_: Vide Adventurer, No."Such operations as required neither celerity nor strength,--the
    low drudgery of collating copies, comparing authorities, _digesting
    dictionaries_, or accumulating compilations."[101] We have done so--theoretically; just as one would reason on
    the human form from the bones outwards: but the Architect of human
    form frames all at once--bone and flesh.[102] Of course mere multiplicability, as of an engraving, does not
    diminish the intrinsic value of the work; and if the casts of
    sculpture could be as sharp as the sculpture itself, they would hold
    to it the relation of value which engravings hold to paintings.And,
    if we choose to have our churches all alike, we might cast them all
    in bronze--we might actually coin churches, and have mints of
    Cathedrals.It would be worthy of the spirit of the century to put
    milled edges for mouldings, and have a popular currency of religious
    subjects: a new cast of nativities every Christmas.I have not heard
    this contemplated, however, and I speak, therefore, only of the
    results which I believe are contemplated, as attainable by mere
    mechanical applications of glass and iron.[103] I shall often have occasion to write measures in the current
    text, therefore the reader will kindly understand that whenever they
    are thus written, 2,, 2, with double commas between, the first
    figures stand for English feet, the second for English inches.[104] I cannot suffer this volume to close without also thanking my
    kind friend, Mr.Rawdon Brown, for help given me in a thousand ways
    during my stay in Venice: but chiefly for his direction to passages
    elucidatory of my subject in the MSS.[105] I have not seen the building itself, but Mr.Owen Jones's work
    may, I suppose, be considered as sufficiently representing it for
    all purposes of criticism.[106] The sculpture of the Drunkenness of Noah on the Ducal Palace,
    of which we shall have much to say hereafter.*       *       *       *       *




CORRECTIONS MADE TO THE ORIGINAL TEXT.Footnote [31] 'Greek porticos' changed to 'Greek porticoes'.Page 161: Added 'r' to 'timbe' in 'long stone or piece of timbe'.Page 237:'rererence' changed to'reference' in 'How is ornament to be
  treated with rererence'.Page 273: 'no' changed to 'not' in 'a peculiar look, which I can no
  otherwise describe'.Page 333: comma changed to period at the paragraph ending with
 'separates its ornament into distinct families, broadly definable'.Page 370: 'two-thsrds' corrected to 'two-thirds'.Page 397: 'bodly' corrected to 'bodily' in'merely through the channel
  of the bodly dexterities'.Page 398: 'calld' corrected to 'called' in 'Men engaged in the practice
  of these are calld artizans'.Page 401: 'necesary' corrected to 'necessary' in 'as Rubens was of that
  necesary for his'.Page 406: Space placement corrected in 'I found it a sugly at last' to
  'I found it as ugly at last'.Page 423: 'Milligen' corrected to 'Millingen' in 'Compare also Milligen,
  Ancient Coins of Cities and Kings'.Page 433: space between 'rappresent' and 'arsi' removed in 'Tre Atti, da
  rappresent arsi'.Page 433: 'del' corrected to 'dell' in 'Traduzione del' Idioma
  Italiana'.It
had been throughout that term in the constant possession of Mr Hewson’s
forefathers and himself, and on quitting his farm he would not suffer
it to be sold with his other stock, but made a present of it to the
in-coming tenant, that the venerable fowl might terminate its career on
the spot where its useful life had been spent such a length of days.”

The taste which has long prevailed among gourmands for the liver of a
goose, and has led to the enormous cruelties exercised in order to cause
its enlargement by rendering the bird diseased in that organ through high
and forced feeding in a warm temperature and close confinement, is well
known; but I doubt if many are aware of the influence of _charcoal_ in
producing an unnatural state of the liver.I had read of charcoal being put into a trough of water to sweeten it for
geese when cooped up; but from a passage in a recent work by Liebig it
would appear that the charcoal acts not as a sweetener of the water, but
in another way on the constitution of the goose.I am tempted to give the extract from its novelty:--“The production of
flesh and fat may be artificially increased: all domestic animals, for
example, contain much fat.We give food to animals which increases the
activity of certain organs, and is itself capable of being transformed
into fat.We add to the quantity of food, or we lessen the progress
of respiration and perspiration by preventing motion.The conditions
necessary to effect this purpose in birds are different from those in
quadrupeds; and it is well known that charcoal powder produces such an
excessive growth in the liver of a goose as at length causes the death of
the animal.”

We are much inferior to the English in the art of preparing poultry for
the market; and this is the more to be regretted in the instance of
geese, especially as we can supply potatoes--which I have shown to be
the chief material of their fattening food--at half their cost in many
parts of England.This advantage alone ought to render the friends of our
agricultural poor earnest in promoting the rearing and fattening of geese
in localities favourable for the purpose.The encouragement of our native manufactures is now a general topic of
conversation and interest, and we hope the present excitement of the
public mind on this subject will be productive of permanent good.We also
hope that the encouragement proposed to be given to articles of Irish
manufacture will be extended to the productions of the head as well as to
those of the hands; that the manufacturer of Irish wit and humour will be
deemed worthy of support as well as those of silks, woollens, or felts;
and, that Irishmen shall venture to estimate the value of Irish produce
for themselves, without waiting as heretofore till they get “the London
stamp” upon them, as our play-going people of old times used to do in the
case of the eminent Irish actors.We are indeed greatly inclined to believe that our Irish manufactures
are rising in estimation in England, from the fact which has come to
our knowledge that many thousands of our Belfast hams are sold annually
at the other side of the water as genuine Yorkshire, and also that many
of those Belfast hams with the Yorkshire stamp find their way back into
“Ould Ireland,” and are bought as English by those who would despise
them as Irish.Now, we should like our countrymen not to be gulled in
this way, but depend upon their own judgment in the matter of hams, and
in like manner in the matter of articles of Irish literary manufacture,
without waiting for the London stamp to be put on them.The necessity
for such discrimination and confidence in their own judgment exists
equally in hams and literature.Thus certain English editors approve so
highly of our articles in the Irish Penny Journal, that they copy them
by wholesale, not only without acknowledgment, but actually do us the
favour to father them as their own!As an example of this patronage, we
may refer to a recent number of the Court Gazette, in which its editor
has been entertaining his aristocratic readers with a little piece of
_badinage_ from our Journal, expressly written for us, and entitled “A
short chapter on Bustles,” but which he gives as written for the said
Court Gazette!Now, this is really very considerate and complimentary,
and we of course feel grateful.But, better again, we find our able and
kind friend the editor of the _Monitor_ and _Irishman_, presenting, no
doubt inadvertently, this very article to his Irish readers a few weeks
ago--not even as an Irish article that had got the London stamp upon it,
but as actually one of true British manufacture--the produce of the Court
Gazette.Now, in perfect good humour, we ask our friend, as such we have reason to
consider him, could he not as well have copied this article from our own
Journal, and given us the credit of it--and would it not be worthy of the
consistency and patriotism of the _Irishman_, who writes so ably in the
cause of Irish manufactures, to extend his support, as far as might be
compatible with truth and honesty, to the native literature of Ireland?*       *       *       *       *

    Printed and published every Saturday by GUNN and CAMERON, at
    the Office of the General Advertiser, No.6, Church Lane,
    College Green, Dublin.--Sold by all Booksellers.End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Irish Penny Journal, Vol."I didn't think it was so much.""The fact is, I have only three dollars just now; and I promised to go
out to ride with a fellow next Sunday.So, you see, if I pay you, I
shall not have enough left to foot the bills."Harry looked at his visitor with astonishment; he did not know what to
make of him.Would a son of Joseph Flint go out to
ride--on Sunday, too--while his mother and his brothers and sisters
were on the very brink of starvation?Our hero had some strange,
old-fashioned notions of his own.For instance, he considered it a
son's duty to take care of his mother, even if he were obliged to
forego the Sunday ride; that he ought to do all he could for his
brothers and sisters, even if he had to go without stewed oysters,
stay away from the theatre, and perhaps wear a little coarser cloth on
his back.If Harry was unreasonable in his views, my young reader will
remember that he was brought up in the country, where young America is
not quite so "fast" as in the city."I didn't ask you to pay me," continued Harry."I know that; but, you see, I suppose I ought to pay you.The old man
don't take much care of the family."Harry wanted to say that the young man did not appear to do much
better; but he was disposed to be as civil as the circumstances would
permit."Oh, yes, I shall pay you; but if you can wait till the first of next
month, I should like it."I am a clerk in a store
downtown," replied Edward, with offended dignity."Pretty fair; I get five dollars a week."I should think you did get paid pretty
well!"exclaimed Harry, astonished at the vastness of the sum for a
week's work."Fair salary," added Edward, complacently."I work in the stable and about the house.""Six dollars a month and perquisites.""It is as well as I can do.""No, it isn't; why don't you go into a store?"We pay from two to four dollars a week."asked Harry, now much interested in his
companion."Make the fires, sweep out in the morning, go on errands, and such
work.Boys must begin at the foot of the ladder.I began at the foot
of the ladder," answered Mr.Flint, with an immense self-sufficiency,
which Harry, however, failed to notice."I should like to get into a store.""You will have a good chance to rise.""I am willing to do anything, so that I can have a chance to get
ahead."As it was, he was left to
infer that Mr.Flint was a partner in the concern, unless the five
dollars per week was an argument to the contrary; but he didn't like
to ask strange questions, and desired to know whom "he worked for."Edward Flint did not "work for" anybody.He was a clerk in the
extensive dry goods establishment of the Messrs.Wake & Wade, which,
he declared, was the largest concern in Boston; and one might further
have concluded that Mr.Flint was the most important personage in the
said concern.Flint was obliged to descend from his lofty dignity, and compound
the dollar and twenty cents with the stable boy by promising to get
him the vacant place in the establishment of Wake & Wade, if his
influence was sufficient to procure it.Harry was satisfied, and
begged him not to distress himself about the debt.The visitor took
his leave, promising to see him again the next day.About noon Joe Flint appeared at the stable again, perfectly sober.Major Phillips had lent him ten dollars, in anticipation of his
month's wages, and he had been home to attend to the comfort of his
suffering family.After dinner he had a long talk with Harry, in
which, after paying him the money disbursed on the previous evening,
he repeated his solemn resolution to drink no more.He was very
grateful to Harry, and hoped he should be able to do as much for him."Don't drink any more, Joe, and it will be the best day's work I ever
did," added Harry.CHAPTER XVI

IN WHICH HARRY GOES INTO THE DRYGOODS BUSINESS


Mr.Edward Flint's reputation as a gentleman of honor and a man of his
word suffered somewhat in Harry's estimation; for he waited all day,
and all evening, without hearing a word from the firm of Wake & Wade.He had actually begun to doubt whether the accomplished young man had
as much influence with the firm as he had led him to suppose.But his
ambition would not permit him longer to be satisfied with the humble
sphere of a stable boy; and he determined, if he did not hear from
Edward, to apply for the situation himself.The next day, having procured two hours' leave of absence from the
stable, he called at the home of Joe Flint to obtain further
particulars concerning Edward and his situation.He found the family
in much better circumstances than at his previous visit.Flint
was sitting up, and was rapidly convalescing; Katy was busy and
cheerful; and it seemed a different place from that to which he had
been the messenger of hope and comfort two nights before.They were very glad to see him, and poured forth their gratitude to
him so eloquently that he was obliged to change the topic.Flint
was sure that her husband was an altered man.She had never before
known him to be so earnest and solemn in his resolutions to amend and
lead a new life.But when Harry alluded to Edward, both Katy and her mother suddenly
grew red.They acknowledged that they had sent for him in their
extremity, but that he did not come till the next morning, when the
bounty of the stable boy had relieved them from the bitterness of
want.The mother dropped a tear as she spoke of the wayward son; and
Harry had not the heart to press the inquiries he had come to make.After speaking as well as he dared to speak of Edward, he took his
leave, and hastened to the establishment of Wake & Wade, to apply for
the vacant place.He had put on his best clothes, and his appearance
this time was very creditable.Entering the store, he inquired for Edward Flint; and that gentleman
was summoned to receive him."I
declare I forgot all about you.""I thought likely," replied Harry, willing to be very charitable to
the delinquent."The fact is, we have been so busy in the store I haven't had time to
call on you, as I promised."Do you think there is any chance for me?""Wait here a moment till I speak with one of the partners."The clerk left him, and was absent but a moment, when Harry was
summoned to the private room of Mr.The gentleman questioned him
for a few moments, and seemed to be pleased with his address and his
frankness.The result of the interview was that our hero was engaged
at a salary of three dollars a week, though it was objected to him
that he had no parents residing in the city."I thought I could fix it," said Edward, complacently, as they left
the counting room."I am much obliged to you, Edward," replied Harry, willing to humor
his new friend."Now I want to get a place to board."Suppose we should both board
with your mother.""What, in a ten-footer!"exclaimed Edward, starting back with
astonishment and indignation at the proposal.If it is good enough for your mother, isn't it good enough
for you?""We can fix up a room to suit ourselves, you know.And it will be much
cheaper for both of us.""That, indeed; but the idea of boarding with the old man is not to be
thought of.""I should think you would like to be with your mother and your
brothers and sisters."The clerk promised to think about it, but did not consider it very
probable that he should agree to the proposition.Harry returned to the stable, and immediately notified Major Phillips
of his intention to leave his service.As may be supposed, the stable
keeper was sorry to lose him; but he did not wish to stand in the way
of his advancement.He paid him his wages, adding a gift of five
dollars, and kindly permitted him to leave at once, as he desired to
procure a place to board, and to acquaint himself with the localities
of the city, so that he could discharge his duty the more acceptably
to his new employers.The ostlers, too, were sorry to part with him--particularly Joe Flint,
whose admiration of our hero was unbounded.In their rough and honest
hearts they wished him well.They had often made fun of his good
principles; often laughed at him for refusing to pitch cents in the
back yard on Sunday, and for going to church instead; often ridiculed
him under the name of "Little Pious"; still they had a great respect
for him.They who are "persecuted for righteousness' sake"--who are
made fun of because they strive to do right--are always sure of
victory in the end.They may be often tried, but sooner or later they
shall triumph.After dinner, he paid another visit to Mrs.He
opened his proposition to board in her family, to which she raised
several objections, chief of which was that she had no room.The plan
was more favorably received by Katy; and she suggested that they could
hire the little apartment upstairs, which was used as a kind of lumber
room by the family in the other part of the house.Her mother finally consented to the arrangement, and it became
necessary to decide upon the terms, for Harry was a prudent manager,
and left nothing to be settled afterwards.He then introduced the
project he had mentioned to Edward; and Mrs.Flint thought she could
board them both for three dollars a week, if they could put up with
humble fare.Harry declared that he was not "difficult," though he
could not speak for Edward.Our hero was delighted with the success of his scheme, and only wished
that Edward had consented to the arrangement; but the next time he saw
him, somewhat to his surprise, the clerk withdrew his objections, and
entered heartily into the scheme."You see, Harry, I shall make a dollar a week--fifty-two dollars a
year--by the arrangement," said Edward, after he had consented.He evidently considered that some apology was due from him for
condescending from the social dignity of his position in the Green
Street boarding house to the humble place beneath his mother's roof."Certainly you will; and that is a great deal of money," replied
Harry."It will pay my theatre tickets, and for a ride once a month besides."asked Harry, astonished at his companion's theory of
economy.I mean to have a good time while I
can.""You could give your mother and Katy a great many nice things with
that money."It is all I can do to take
care of myself.""If I had a mother, and brothers and sisters, I should be glad to
spend all I got in making them happy," sighed Harry.On the following Monday morning, Harry went to his new place.Even the
language of the clerks and salesmen was strange to him; and he was
painfully conscious of the deficiencies of his education and of his
knowledge of business.He was prompt, active and zealous; yet his
awkwardness could not be concealed.The transition from the stable to
the store was as great as from a hovel to a palace.Wade swore at him; and all
the clerks made him the butt of their mirth or their ill nature, just
as they happened to feel.What seemed to him worse than all, Edward Flint joined the popular
side, and laughed and swore with the rest.Poor Harry was almost
discouraged before dinner time, and began very seriously to consider
whether he had not entirely mistaken his calling.Dinner, however,
seemed to inspire him with new courage and new energy; and he hastened
back to the store, resolved to try again.The shop was crowded with customers; and partners and clerks hallooed
"Harry" till he was so confused that he hardly knew whether he stood
on his head or his heels.It was, Come here, Go there, Bring this,
Bring that; but in spite of laugh and curse, of push and kick, he
persevered, suiting nobody, least of all himself.It was a long day, a very long day; but it came to an end at last.Our
hero had hardly strength enough left to put up the shutters.His legs
ached, his head ached, and, worst of all, his heart ached at the
manifest failure of his best intentions.He thought of going to the
partners, and asking them whether they thought he was fit for the
place; but he finally decided to try again for another day, and
dragged himself home to rest his weary limbs.He and Edward had taken possession of their room at Joe Flint's house
that morning; and on their arrival they found that Katy had put
everything in excellent order for their reception.Harry was too much
fatigued and disheartened to have a very lively appreciation of the
comforts of his new home; but Edward, notwithstanding the descent he
had made, was in high spirits.He even declared that the room they
were to occupy was better than his late apartments in Green Street."Do you think I shall get along with my work, Edward?"asked Harry,
gloomily, after they had gone to bed."Everybody in the store has kicked and cuffed me, swore at and abused
me, till I feel like a jelly.""Oh, never mind that; they always do so with a green one.They served
me just so when I first went into business.""It seemed to me just as though I never could suit them.""I can't help it, I know I did not suit them.""What made them laugh at me and swear at me, then?""That is the fashion; you must talk right up to them.If they swear at
you, swear at them back again--that is, the clerks and salesmen.If
they give you any 'lip,' let 'em have as good as they send."When you go among
the Romans, do as the Romans do."Harry did not like this advice; for he who, among the Romans, would do
as the Romans do, among hogs would do as the hogs do."If I only suit them, I don't care.""You do; I heard Wake tell Wade that you were a first-rate boy."And Harry's heart swelled with joy to think that, in spite
of his trials, he had actually triumphed in the midst of them.So he dropped the subject, with the resolution to redouble his
exertions to please his employers the next day, and turned his
thoughts to Julia Bryant, to wonder if she were still living, or had
become an angel indeed.CHAPTER XVII

IN WHICH HARRY REVISITS ROCKVILLE, AND MEETS WITH A SERIOUS LOSS


The next evening Harry was conscious of having gained a little in the
ability to discharge his novel duties.Either the partners and the
clerks had become tired of swearing and laughing at him, or he had
made a decided improvement, for less fault was found with him, and
his position was much more satisfactory.With a light heart he put up
the shutters; for though he was very much fatigued, the prestige of
future success was so cheering that he scarcely heeded his weary,
aching limbs.Every day was an improvement on the preceding day, and before the week
was out Harry found himself quite at home in his new occupation.He
was never a moment behind the time at which he was required to be at
the store in the morning.This promptness was specially noted by the
partners; for when they came to their business in the morning they
found the store well warmed, the floor nicely swept, and everything
put in order.When he was sent out with bundles he did not stop to look at the
pictures in the shop windows, to play marbles or tell long stories to
other boys in the streets.If his employers had even been very
unreasonable, they could not have helped being pleased with the new
boy, and Wake confidentially assured Wade that they had got a
treasure.He intended to make a man
of himself, and he could only accomplish his purpose by constant
exertion, by constant study and constant "trying again."He was
obliged to keep a close watch over himself, for often he was tempted
to be idle and negligent, to be careless and indifferent.After supper, on Thursday evening of his second week at Wake & Wade's,
he hastened to Major Phillips' stable to see John Lane, and obtain the
news from Rockville.His heart beat violently when he saw John's great
wagon, for he dreaded some fearful announcement from his sick friend.He had not before been so deeply conscious of his indebtedness to the
little angel as now, when she lay upon the bed of pain, perhaps of
death.She had kindled in his soul a love for the good and the
beautiful.She had inspired him with a knowledge of the difference
between the right and the wrong.In a word, she was the guiding star
of his existence.Her approbation was the bright guerdon of fidelity
to truth and principle.asked Harry, without giving John time to inquire why
he had left the stable."They think she is a little grain better."continued Harry, a great load of anxiety
removed from his soul."She is; but it is very doubtful how it will turn.I went in to see
her yesterday, and she spoke of you.""She said she should like to see you.""I should like to see her very much.""Her father told me, if you was a mind to go up to Rockville, he would
pay your expenses."I will go, if I can get away."Julia is an only child, and he
would do anything in the world to please her.""I will go and see the gentlemen I work for, and if they will let me,
I will go with you to-morrow morning.""Better take the stage; you will get there so much quicker."Harry returned home to ascertain of Edward where Mr.Wake lived, and
hastened to see him.That gentleman, however, coldly assured him if he
went to Rockville he must lose his place--they could not get along
without a boy.In vain Harry urged that he should be gone but two
days; the senior was inflexible.said he to himself, when he got into the street
again.Wake says she is no relation of mine, and he don't see why
I should go.She may die, and I shall never see her again.It did not require a great deal of deliberation to convince himself
that it was his duty to visit the sick girl.She had been a true
friend to him, and he could afford to sacrifice his place to procure
her even a slight gratification.Affection and duty called him one
way, self-interest the other.If he did not go, he should regret it as
long as he lived.Wake would take him again on his
return; if not, he could at least go to work in the stable again."Edward, I am going to Rockville to-morrow," he remarked to his
"chum," on his return to Mrs."The old man agreed to it, then?He never will
let a fellow off even for a day.""He did not; but I must go."He will discharge you, for he is a hard nut.""I must go," repeated Harry, taking a candle, and going up to their
chamber."You have got more spunk than I gave you credit for; but you are sure
of losing your place," replied Edward, following him upstairs.Harry opened a drawer in the old broken bureau in the room, and from
beneath his clothes took out the great pill box which served him for a
savings bank."You have got lots of money," remarked Edward, as he glanced at the
contents of the box."Not much; only twelve dollars," replied Harry, taking out three of
them to pay his expenses to Rockville."You won't leave that box there, will you, while you are gone?"I can hide it, though, before I go."Harry took his money and went to a bookstore in Washington Street,
where he purchased an appropriate present for Julia, for which he gave
half a dollar.On his return, he wrote her name in it, with his own as
the giver.Then the safety of his money came up for consideration; and
this matter was settled by raising a loose board in the floor and
depositing the pill box in a secure place.He had scarcely done so
before Edward joined him.He was not altogether
satisfied with the step he was about to take.It was not doing right
by his employers; but he compromised the matter in part by engaging
Edward, "for a consideration," to make the fires and sweep out the
next morning.At noon, on the following day, he reached Rockville, and hastened to
the house of Mr.he asked, breathless with interest, of the girl who
answered his knock.Harry was conducted into the house, and Mr.Bryant was informed of his
presence."I am glad you have come, Harry.Julia is much better to-day," said
her father, taking him by the hand."She has frequently spoken of you
during her illness, and feels a very strong interest in your welfare."I don't know what would have become of me if
she had not been a friend to me.""That is the secret of her interest in you.We love those best whom we
serve most.She is asleep now; but you shall see her as soon as she
wakes.In the meantime you had better have your dinner."Bryant looked very pale, and his eyes were reddened with weeping.Harry saw how much he had suffered during the last fortnight; but it
seemed natural to him that he should suffer terribly at the thought of
losing one so beautiful and precious as the little angel.Bryant could not leave the
couch of the little sufferer.The fond father could speak of nothing
but Julia, and more than once the tears flooded his eyes, as he told
Harry how meek and patient she had been through the fever, how loving
she was, and how resigned even to leave her parents, and go to the
heavenly Parent, to dwell with Him forever.Harry wept, too; and after dinner he almost feared to enter the
chamber, and behold the wreck which disease had made of this bright
and beautiful form.Removing the wrapper from the book he had
brought--a volume of sweet poems, entitled "Angel Songs"--he followed
Mr.Bryant into the sick girl's chamber."Ah, Harry, I am delighted to see you!"exclaimed she, in a whisper,
for her diseased throat rendered articulation difficult and painful."I am sorry to see you so sick, Julia," replied Harry, taking the
wasted hand she extended to him.I feel as though I should get well now.""You don't know how much I have thought of you while I lay here; how I
wished you were my brother, and could come in every day and see me,"
she continued, with a faint smile."Now tell me how you get along in Boston.""Very well; but your father says I must not talk much with you now.I
have brought you a little book," and he placed it in her hand.Now, Harry, you
must read me one of the angel songs.""I will; but I can't read very well," said he, as he opened the
volume.The piece he selected was a very
pretty and a very touching little song; and Harry's feelings were so
deeply moved by the pathetic sentiments of the poem and their
adaptation to the circumstances of the case, that he was quite
eloquent.Bryant interfered to prevent further
conversation; and Julia, though she had a great deal to say to her
young friend, cheerfully yielded to her mother's wishes, and Harry
reluctantly left the room.Towards night he was permitted to see her again, when he read several
of the angel songs to her, and gave her a brief account of the events
of his residence in Boston.She was pleased with his earnestness, and
smiled approvingly upon him for the moral triumphs he had achieved.The reward of all his struggles with trial and temptation was lavishly
bestowed in her commendation, and if fidelity had not been its own
reward, he could have accepted her approval as abundant compensation
for all he had endured.There was no silly sentiment in Harry's
composition; he had read no novels, seen no plays, knew nothing of
romance even "in real life."The homage he yielded to the fair and
loving girl was an unaffected reverence for simple purity and
goodness; that which the True Heart and the True Life never fail to
call forth whenever they exert their power.On the following morning, Julia's condition was very much improved,
and the physician spoke confidently of a favorable issue.Harry was
permitted to spend an hour by her bedside, inhaling the pure spirit
that pervaded the soul of the sick one.She was so much better that
her father proposed to visit the city, to attend to some urgent
business, which had been long deferred by her illness; and an
opportunity was thus afforded for Harry to return.Bryant drove furiously in his haste, changing horses twice on the
journey, so that they reached the city at one o'clock.On their
arrival, Harry's attention naturally turned to the reception he
expected to receive from his employers.He had not spoken of his
relations with them at Rockville, preferring not to pain them, on the
one hand, and not to take too much credit to himself for his devotion
to Julia, on the other.After the horse was disposed of at Major
Phillips's stable, Mr.Bryant walked down town with Harry; and when
they reached the store of Wake & Wade, he entered with him.asked the senior partner, rather
coldly, when he saw the delinquent.Harry was confused at this reception, though it was not unexpected."I didn't know but that you might be willing to take me again."Did you say that you did not want my
young friend, here?"Bryant, taking the offered hand of
Mr."I did say so," said the senior."I was not aware that he was your
friend, though," and he proceeded to inform Mr.Bryant that Harry had
left them against their wish."A few words with you, if you please."Wake conducted him to the private office, where they remained for
half an hour."It is all right, Harry," continued Mr.ejaculated our hero, rejoiced to find his place was
still secure."I would not have gone if I could possibly have helped
it.""You did right, my boy, and I honor you for your courage and
constancy."Bryant bade him an affectionate adieu, promising to write to him
often until Julia recovered, and then departed.With a grateful heart Harry immediately resumed his duties, and the
partners were probably as glad to retain him as he was to remain.At night, when he went to his chamber, he raised the loose board to
get the pill box, containing his savings, in order to return the money
he had not expended.To his consternation, he discovered that it was
gone!CHAPTER XVIII

IN WHICH HARRY MEETS WITH AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE AND GETS A HARD KNOCK ON
THE HEAD


It was in vain that Harry searched beneath the broken floor for his
lost treasure; it could not be found.He raised the boards up, and
satisfied himself that it had not slipped away into any crevice, or
fallen through into the room below; and the conclusion was inevitable
that the box had been stolen.The mystery confused Harry, for he was certain
that no one had seen him deposit the box beneath the floor.No one
except Edward even knew that he had any money.Flint nor Katy would have stolen it; and he was not
willing to believe that his room-mate would be guilty of such a mean
and contemptible act.He tried to assure himself that it had not been stolen--that it was
still somewhere beneath the floor; and he pulled up another board, to
resume the search.He had scarcely done so before Edward joined him.he asked, apparently very much astonished
at his chum's occupation."Are you going to pull the house down?"replied Harry, suspending
operations to watch Edward's expression when he told him of his loss."Put it here, under this loose board."Edward manifested a great deal of enthusiasm in the search.He was
sure it must be where Harry had put it, or that it had rolled back out
of sight; and he began tearing up the floor with a zeal that
threatened the destruction of the building.But the box could not be
found, and they were obliged to abandon the search."That is a fact; I can't spare that money, anyhow.I have been a good
while earning it, and it is too thundering bad to lose it.""I don't understand it," continued Edward."Nor I either," replied Harry, looking his companion sharp in the eye."No one knew I had it but you.""Do you mean to say I stole it?"exclaimed Edward, doubling his fist,
while his cheek reddened with anger.I didn't mean to lay it to you."And Edward was very glad to have the matter compromised."I did not; perhaps I spoke hastily.You know how hard I worked for
this money; and it seems hard to lose it.But no matter; I will try
again."Flint and Katy were much grieved when Harry told of his loss.They looked as though they suspected Edward, but said nothing, for it
was very hard to accuse a son or a brother of such a crime.Flint advised Harry to put his money in the savings bank in
future, promising to take care of his spare funds till they amounted
to five dollars, which was then the smallest sum that would be
received.It was a long time before our hero became reconciled to his
loss.He had made up his mind to be a rich man; and he had carefully
hoarded every cent he could spare, thus closely imitating the man who
got rich by saving his fourpences.A few days after the loss he was reading in one of Katy's Sunday
school books about a miser.The wretch was held up as a warning to
young folks by showing them how he starved his body and soul for the
sake of gold.exclaimed Harry, as he laid the book
upon the window."I have been hoarding up my money just like this old man in the book."You couldn't be mean and stingy if you
tried.""A miser wouldn't do what you did for us, Harry," added Mrs."I have been thinking too much of money.After all, perhaps it was
just as well that I lost that money.""I am sorry you lost it; for I don't think there is any danger of your
becoming a miser," said Katy."Perhaps not; at any rate, it has set me to thinking."Harry finished the book; and it was, fortunately, just such a work as
he required to give him right and proper views in regard to the value
of wealth.His dream of being a rich man was essentially modified by
these views; and he renewedly resolved that it was better to be a good
man than a rich man, if he could not be both.It seemed to him a
little remarkable that the minister should preach upon this very topic
on the following Sunday, taking for his text the words, "Seek ye first
the kingdom of heaven and all these things shall be added unto you."He was deeply impressed by the sermon, probably because it was on a
subject to which he had given some attention.A few days after his return from Rockville, Harry received a very
cheerful letter from Mr.Bryant, to which Julia had added a few lines
in a postscript.The little angel was rapidly recovering, and our hero
was rejoiced beyond expression.The favorable termination of her
illness was a joy which far outbalanced the loss of his money, and he
was as cheerful and contented as ever.As he expressed it, in rather
homely terms, he had got "the streak of fat and the streak of lean."Julia was alive; was to smile upon him again; was still to inspire him
with that love of goodness which had given her such an influence over
him.Week after week passed by, and Harry heard nothing of his lost
treasure; but Julia had fully recovered, and for the treasure lost an
incomparably greater treasure had been gained.Edward and himself
continued to occupy the same room, though ever since the loss of the
money box Harry's chum had treated him coldly.There had never been
much sympathy between them; for while Edward was at the theatre, or
perhaps at worse places, Harry was at home, reading some good book,
writing a letter to Rockville, or employed in some other worthy
occupation.While Harry was at church or at the Sunday school, Edward,
in company with some dissolute companion, was riding about the
adjacent country.Flint often remonstrated with her son upon the life he led, and
the dissipated habits he was contracting; and several times Harry
ventured to introduce the subject.Edward, however, would not hear a
word from either.It is true that we either grow better or worse, as
we advance in life; and Edward Flint's path was down a headlong steep.His mother wept and begged him to be a better boy.Harry often wondered how he could afford to ride out and visit the
theatre and other places of amusement so frequently.His salary was
only five dollars a week now; it was only four when he had said it was
five.He seemed to have money at all times, and to spend it very
freely.He could not help believing that the contents of his pill box
had paid for some of the "stews" and "Tom and Jerrys" which his
reckless chum consumed.But the nine dollars he had lost would have
been but a drop in the bucket compared with his extravagant outlays.One day, about six months after Harry's return from Rockville, as he
was engaged behind the counter, a young man entered the store and
accosted him.It was a familiar voice; and, to Harry's surprise, but not much to his
satisfaction, he recognized his old companion, Ben Smart, who, he had
learned from Mr.Bryant, had been sent to the house of correction for
burning Squire Walker's barn."Yes, I have been here six months.""You have got a sign out for a boy, I see."There were more errands to run than one boy
could attend to; besides, Harry had proved himself so faithful and so
intelligent, that Mr.Wake wished to retain him in the store, to fit
him for a salesman."You can speak a good word for me, Harry; for I should like to work
here," continued Ben."I thought you were in--in the--"

Harry did not like to use the offensive expression, and Ben's face
darkened when he discovered what the other was going to say."Not a word about that," said he."If you ever mention that little
matter, I'll take your life.""My father got me out, and then I ran away.Not a word more, for I had
as lief be hung for an old sheep as a lamb."Wake; you can apply to him," continued Harry.The senior
talked with him a few moments, and then retired to his private office,
calling Harry as he entered."If you say anything, I will be the death of you," whispered Ben, as
Harry passed him on his way to the office.Our hero was not particularly pleased with these threats; he certainly
was not frightened by them.Wake, as he presented himself
before the senior."Who is he, and what is he?"Bryant told you the story about my leaving Redfield,"
said Harry."That is the boy that run away with me.""And the one that set the barn afire?"And Harry returned to his work at the counter.Before Harry had time to make any reply, Mr."We don't want you, young man," said he.With a glance of hatred at Harry, the applicant left the store.Since
leaving Redfield, our hero's views of duty had undergone a change; and
he now realized that to screen a wicked person was to plot with him
against the good order of society.He knew Ben's character; he had no
reason, after their interview, to suppose it was changed; and he could
not wrong his employers by permitting them ignorantly to engage a bad
boy, especially when he had been questioned directly on the point.Towards evening Harry was sent with a bundle to a place in Boylston
Street, which required him to cross the Common.On his return, when he
reached the corner of the burying ground, Ben Smart, who had evidently
followed him, and lay in wait at this spot for him, sprang from his
covert upon him.The young villain struck him a heavy blow in the eye
before Harry realized his purpose.The blow, however, was vigorously
returned; but Ben, besides being larger and stronger than his victim,
had a large stone in his hand, with which he struck him a blow on the
side of his head, knocking him insensible to the ground.The wretch, seeing that he had done his work, fled along the side of
the walk of the burying ground, pursued by several persons who had
witnessed the assault.Ben was a fleet runner this time, and succeeded
in making his escape.CHAPTER XIX

IN WHICH HARRY FINDS THAT EVEN A BROKEN HEAD MAY BE OF SOME USE TO A
PERSON


When Harry recovered his consciousness, he found himself in an
elegantly furnished chamber, with several persons standing around the
bed upon which he had been laid.A physician was standing over him,
engaged in dressing the severe wound he had received in the side of
his head."There, young man, you have had a narrow escape," said the doctor, as
he saw his patient's eyes open.asked Harry, faintly, as he tried to concentrate his
wandering senses."You are in good hands, my boy.replied the sufferer, trying to
rise on the bed."Do you feel as though you could walk home?""I don't know; I feel kind of faint.""No, sir; it feels numb, and everything seems to be flying round."Harry expressed an earnest desire to go home, and the physician
consented to accompany him in a carriage to Mrs.He
had been conveyed in his insensible condition to a house in Boylston
Street, the people of which were very kind to him, and used every
effort to make him comfortable.A carriage was procured, and Harry was assisted to enter it; for he
was so weak and confused that he could not stand alone.Ben had struck
him a terrible blow; and, as the physician declared, it was almost a
miracle that he had not been killed.Flint and Katy were shocked and alarmed when they saw the
helpless boy borne into the house; but everything that the
circumstances required was done for him.he asked, when they had placed him on the bed."They will wonder what has become of me at the store," continued the
sufferer, whose thoughts reverted to his post of duty."I will go down to the store and tell them what has happened," said
Mr.Callender, the kind gentleman to whose house Harry had been
carried, and who had attended him to his home."Thank you, sir; you are very good.I don't want them to think that I
have run away, or anything of that sort.""They will not think so, I am sure," returned Mr.Callender, as he
departed upon his mission."Do you think I can go to the store to-morrow?"asked Harry, turning
to the physician."I am afraid not; you must keep very quiet for a time."He had never been sick a day in
his life; and it seemed to him just then as though the world could not
possibly move on without him to help the thing along.A great many
persons cherish similar notions, and cannot afford to be sick a single
day.I should like to tell my readers at some length what blessings come to
us while we are sick; what angels with healing ministrations for the
soul visit the couch of pain; what holy thoughts are sometimes kindled
in the darkened chamber; what noble resolutions have their birth in
the heart when the head is pillowed on the bed of sickness.But my
remaining space will not permit it; and I content myself with
remarking that sickness in its place is just as great a blessing as
health; that it is a part of our needed discipline.When any of my
young friends are sick, therefore, let them yield uncomplainingly to
their lot, assured that He who hath them in his keeping "doeth all
things well."Harry was obliged to learn this lesson; and when the pain in his head
began to be almost intolerable, he fretted and vexed himself about
things at the store.He was not half as patient as he might have been;
and, during the evening, he said a great many hard things about Ben
Smart, the author of his misfortune.I am sorry to say he cherished
some malignant, revengeful feelings towards him, and looked forward
with a great deal of satisfaction to the time when he should be
arrested and punished for his crime.Wade called upon him as soon as they heard of
his misfortune.They were very indignant when they learned that Harry
was suffering for telling the truth.They assured him that they should
miss him very much at the store, but they would do the best they
could--which, of course, was very pleasant to him.But they told him
they could get along without him, bade him not fret, and said his
salary should be paid just the same as though he did his work.Wade continued; "and, as it will cost you more to be sick,
we will raise your wages to four dollars a week."Certainly," replied the junior, warmly.There was no possible excuse for fretting now.With so many kind
friends around him, he had no excuse for fretting; but his human
nature rebelled at his lot, and he made himself more miserable than
the pain of his wound could possibly have made him.Flint, who
sat all night by his bedside, labored in vain to make him resigned to
his situation.It seemed as though the great trial of his lifetime had
come--that which he was least prepared to meet and conquer.His head ached, and the pain of his
wound was very severe.His moral condition was, if possible, worse
than on the preceding night.He was fretful, morose, and unreasonable
towards those kind friends who kept vigil around his bedside.Strange
as it may seem, and strange as it did seem to himself, his thoughts
seldom reverted to the little angel.Once, when he thought of her
extended on the bed of pain as he was then, her example seemed to
reproach him.She had been meek and patient through all her
sufferings--had been content to die, even, if it was the will of the
Father in heaven.With a peevish exclamation, he drove her--his
guardian angel, as she often seemed to him--from his mind, with the
reflection that she could not have been as sick as he was, that she
did not endure as much pain as he did.For several days he remained in
pretty much the same state.His head ached, and the fever burned in
his veins.His moral symptoms were not improved, and he continued to
snarl and growl at those who took care of him."Give me some cold water, marm; I don't want your slops," fretted he,
when Mrs."But the doctor says you mustn't have cold water."Give me a glass of cold water, and I will--"

The door opened then, causing him to suspend the petulant words; for
one stood there whose good opinion he valued more than that of any
other person.I am so sorry to see you so sick!"exclaimed Julia Bryant,
rushing to his bedside.She was followed by her father and mother; and Katy had admitted them
unannounced to the chamber.replied Harry, smiling for the first time since
the assault."Yes, Harry; I hope you are better.When I heard about it last night,
I would not give father any peace till he promised to bring me to
Boston.""Don't be so wild, Julia," interposed her mother."You forget that he
is very sick.""Forgive me, Harry; I was so glad and so sorry.I hope I didn't make
your head ache," she added, in a very gentle tone.It was very good of you to come and see me."Harry felt a change come over him the moment she entered the room.The
rebellious thoughts in his bosom seemed to be banished by her
presence; and though his head ached and his flesh burned as much as
ever, he somehow had more courage to endure them.Bryant had asked him a few questions, and expressed
their sympathy in proper terms, they departed, leaving Julia to remain
with the invalid for a couple of hours."I did not expect to see you, Julia," said Harry, when they had gone."Didn't you think I would do as much for you as you did for me?"I am only a poor boy, and you are a
rich man's child."You can't think how bad I
felt when father got Mr."It's a hard case to be knocked down in that way, and laid up in the
house for a week or two.""I know it; but we must be patient."I haven't any patience--not a bit.If I could get
hold of Ben Smart, I would choke him.I hope they will catch him and
send him to the state prison for life."These malignant words did not sound like those of
the Harry West she had known and loved.They were so bitter that they
curdled the warm blood in her veins, and the heart of Harry seemed
less tender than before."Harry," said she, in soft tones, and so sad that he could not but
observe the change which had come over her."No, I am sure you don't.asked he, deeply impressed by the sad and solemn
tones of the little angel."Forgive Ben Smart, after he has almost killed me?"Julia took up the
Bible, which lay on the table by the bedside--it was the one she had
given him--and read several passages upon the topic she had
introduced.The gentle rebuke she administered
touched his soul, and he thought how peevish and ill-natured he had
been."You have been badly hurt, Harry, and you are very sick.Now, let me
ask you one question: Which would you rather be, Harry West, sick as
you are, or Ben Smart, who struck the blow?""I had rather be myself," replied he, promptly."You ought to be glad that you are Harry West, instead of Ben Smart.Sick as you are, I am sure you are a great deal happier than he can
be, even if he is not punished for striking you."Here I have been
grumbling and growling all the time for four days.It is lucky for me that I am Harry, instead of Ben.""I am sure I have been a great deal better since I was sick than
before.When I lay on the bed, hardly able to move, I kept thinking
all the time; and my thoughts did me a great deal of good."Harry had learned his lesson, and Julia's presence was indeed an
angel's visit.For an hour longer she sat by his bed, and her words
were full of inspiration; and when her father called for her he could
hardly repress a tear as she bade him good night.Flint and Katy to forgive him for
being so cross, promising to be patient in the future.She read to him, conversed
with him about the scenes of the preceding autumn in the woods, and
told him again about her own illness.In the afternoon she bade him a
final adieu, as she was to return that day to her home.The patience and resignation which he had learned gave a favorable
turn to his sickness, and he began to improve.It was a month,
however, before he was able to take his place in the store again.Without the assistance of Julia, perhaps, he had not learned the moral
of sickness so well.As it was, he came forth from his chamber with
truer and loftier motives, and with a more earnest desire to lead the
true life.Ben Smart had been arrested; and, shortly after his recovery, Harry
was summoned as a witness at his trial.It was a plain case, and Ben
was sent to the house of correction for a long term.CHAPTER XX

IN WHICH HARRY PASSES THROUGH HIS SEVEREST TRIAL, AND ACHIEVES HIS
GREATEST TRIUMPH


Three years may appear to be a great while to the little pilgrim
through life's vicissitudes; but they soon pass away and are as "a
tale that is told."To note all the events of Harry's experience
through this period would require another volume; therefore I can only
tell the reader what he was, and what results he had achieved in that
time.It was filled with trials and temptations, not all of which were
overcome without care and privation.Often he failed, was often
disappointed, and often was pained to see how feebly the Spirit warred
against the Flesh.He loved money, and avarice frequently prompted him to do those things
which would have wrecked his bright hopes.That vision of the grandeur
and influence of the rich man's position sometimes deluded him,
causing him to forget at times that the soul would live forever, while
the body and its treasures would perish in the grave.As he grew
older, he reasoned more; his principles became more firmly fixed; and
the object of existence assumed a more definite character.He was an
attentive student, and every year not only made him wiser, but better.I do not mean to say that Harry was a remarkably good boy, that his
character was perfect, or anything of the kind.He meant well, and
tried to do well, and he did not struggle in vain against the trials
and temptations that beset him.I dare say those with whom he
associated did not consider him much better than themselves.It is
true, he did not swear, did not frequent the haunts of vice and
dissipation, did not spend his Sundays riding about the country; yet
he had his faults, and captious people did not fail to see them.He was still with Wake & Wade, though he was a salesman now, on a
salary of five dollars a week.Flint,
though Edward was no longer his room-mate.A year had been sufficient
to disgust his "fast" companion with the homely fare and homely
quarters of his father's house; and, as his salary was now eight
dollars a week, he occupied a room in the attic of a first-class
hotel.Harry was sixteen years old, and he had three hundred dollars in the
Savings Bank.He might have had more if he had not so carefully
watched and guarded against the sin of avarice.He gave some very
handsome sums to the various public charities, as well as expended
them in relieving distress wherever it presented itself.It is true,
it was sometimes very hard work to give of his earnings to relieve the
poor; and if he had acted in conformity with the nature he had
inherited, he might never have known that it was "more blessed to give
than to receive."As he grew older, and the worth of money was more
apparent, he was tempted to let the poor and the unfortunate take care
of themselves; but the struggle of duty with parsimony rendered his
gifts all the more worthy.Joe Flint had several times violated his solemn resolution to drink no
more ardent spirits; but Harry, who was his friend and confidant,
encouraged him, when he failed, to try again; and it was now nearly a
year since he had been on a "spree."Our hero occasionally heard from Rockville; and a few months before
the event we are about to narrate he had spent the pleasantest week of
his life with Julia Bryant, amid those scenes which were so full of
interest to both of them.As he walked through the woods where he had
first met the "little angel"--she had now grown to be a tall girl--he
could not but recall the events of that meeting.It was there that he
first began to live, in the true sense of the word.It was there that
he had been born into a new sphere of moral existence.Julia was still his friend, still his guiding star.Though the freedom
of childish intimacy had been diminished, the same heart resided in
each, and each felt the same interest in the other.The correspondence
between them had been almost wholly suspended, perhaps by the
interference of the "powers" at Rockville, and perhaps by the growing
sense of the "fitness of things" in the parties.But they occasionally
met, which amply compensated for the deprivations which propriety
demanded.But I must pass on to the closing event of my story--it was Harry's
severest trial, yet it resulted in his most signal triumph.He lived extravagantly, and
his increased salary was insufficient to meet his wants.When Harry
saw him drive a fast horse through the streets on Sundays, and heard
him say how often he went to the theatre, what balls and parties he
attended--when he observed how elegantly he dressed, and that he wore
a gold chain, a costly breastpin and several rings--he did not wonder
that he was "short."He lived like a prince, and it seemed as though
eight dollars a week would be but a drop in the bucket in meeting his
expenses.One day, in his extremity, he applied to Harry for the loan of five
dollars.Our hero did not like to encourage his extravagance, but he
was good-natured, and could not well avoid doing the favor, especially
as Edward wanted the money to pay his board.However, he made it the
occasion for a friendly remonstrance, and gave the spendthrift youth
some excellent advice.Edward was vexed at the lecture; but, as he
obtained the loan, he did not resent the kindly act.About a fortnight after, Edward paid him the money.It consisted of a
two-dollar bill and six half dollars.Harry was about to make a
further application of his views of duty to his friend's case, when
Edward impatiently interrupted him, telling him that, as he had got
his money, he need not preach.This was just before Harry went home to
dinner.Wake called him into the private office, and when
they had entered he closed and locked the door.Harry regarded this as
rather a singular proceeding; but, possessing the entire confidence of
his employers, it gave him no uneasiness.Wake began, "we have been losing money from the store for
the last year or more.I have missed small sums a great many times."exclaimed Harry, not knowing whether he was regarded as a
confidant or as the suspected person."To-day I gave a friend of mine several marked coins, with which he
purchased some goods."Now, we have four salesmen besides yourself."I can form no idea, sir," returned Harry."I can only speak for
myself.""Oh, well, I had no suspicion it was you," added Mr."I am going to try the same experiment again; and I want you to
keep your eyes on the money drawer all the rest of the afternoon."Wade took several silver coins from his pocket and scratched them
in such a way that they could be readily identified, and then
dismissed Harry, with the injunction to be very vigilant.When he came out of the office he perceived that Edward and Charles
Wallis were in close conversation."I say, Harry, what's in the wind?"asked the former, as our hero
returned to his position behind the counter.Harry evaded answering the question, and the other two salesmen, who
were very intimate and whose tastes and amusements were very much
alike, continued their conversation.They were evidently aware that
something unusual had occurred, or was about to occur.Soon after, a person appeared at the counter and purchased a dozen
spools of cotton, offering two half dollars in payment.Harry kept his
eye upon the money drawer, but nothing was discovered.From what he
knew of Edward's mode of life, he was prepared to believe that he was
the guilty person.The experiment was tried for three days in succession before any
result was obtained.The coins were always found in the drawer; but on
the fourth day, when they were very busy, and there was a great deal
of money in the drawer, Harry distinctly observed Edward, while making
change, take several coins from the till.The act appalled him; he
forgot the customer to whose wants he was attending, and hastened to
inform Mr."Only to the office," replied he; and his appearance and manner might
have attracted the attention of any skillful rogue."Come, Harry, don't leave your place," added Edward, playfully
grasping him by the collar, on his return."Don't stop to fool, Edward," answered Harry, as he shook him off and
took his place at the counter again.He was very absent-minded the rest of the forenoon, and his frame
shook with agitation as he heard Mr.But he trembled still more when he was summoned also, for it was very
unpleasant business."Of course, you will not object to letting me see the contents of
your pockets, Edward," said Mr."Certainly not, sir;" and he turned every one of his pockets inside
out.Not one of the decoy pieces was found upon him, or any other coins,
for that matter; he had no money.Wake was confused, for he fully
expected to convict the culprit on the spot."I suppose I am indebted to this young man for this," continued
Edward, with a sneer."I'll bet five dollars he stole the money
himself, if any has been stolen."Search me, sir, by all means," added Harry; and he began to turn his
pockets out.From his vest pocket he took out a little parcel wrapped in a shop
bill.I wasn't aware that there was any such thing in my
pocket.""But you seem to know more about it than Edward," remarked Mr.Wade,
as he took the parcel.The senior opened the wrapper, and to his surprise and sorrow found it
contained two of the marked coins.But he was not disposed hastily to
condemn Harry.He could not believe him capable of stealing; besides,
there was something in Edward's manner which seemed to indicate that
our hero was the victim of a conspiracy."As he has been so very generous towards me, Mr.Wake," interposed
Edward, "I will suggest a means by which you may satisfy yourself.My
mother keeps Harry's money for him, and perhaps, if you look it over,
you will find more marked pieces."Wake, I'm innocent," protested Harry, when he had in some measure
recovered from the first shock of the heavy blow."I never stole a
cent from anybody.""I don't believe you ever did, Harry.But can you explain how this
money happened to be in your pocket?"If you wish to look at my money, Mrs."Don't let him go with you, though," said Edward, maliciously.Flint, requesting her to exhibit the
money, and Harry signed it.sneered Edward, when he had gone."So you have been
watching me, I thought as much."Wade told me to do," replied Harry, exceedingly
mortified at the turn the investigation had taken.That is the way with you psalm-singers.Steal yourself, and
lay it to me!""I am sorry, Harry, to find that I have been mistaken in you.Is it
possible that one who is outwardly so correct in his habits should be
a thief?But your career is finished," said he, very sternly, as he
entered the office."Nothing strange to the rest of us," added Edward."I never knew one
yet who pretended to be so pious that did not turn out a rascal."Wake, I am neither a thief nor a hypocrite," replied Harry, with
spirit."I found four of the coins--four half dollars--which I marked first,
at Mrs.Flint's," said the senior, severely.Those half dollars were part of the money paid
him by Edward, and he so explained how they came in his possession.exclaimed Edward, with well-feigned surprise."I
never borrowed a cent of him in my life; and, of course, never paid
him a cent."Harry looked at Edward, amazed at the coolness with which he uttered
the monstrous lie.He questioned him in regard to the transaction, but
the young reprobate reiterated his declaration with so much force and
art that Mr.Our hero, conscious of his innocence, however strong appearances were
against him, behaved with considerable spirit, which so irritated Mr.Wake that he sent for a constable, and Harry soon found himself in
Leverett Street Jail.Strange as it may seem to my young friends, he
was not very miserable there.He was innocent, and he depended upon
that special Providence which had before befriended him to extricate
him from the difficulty.It is true, he wondered what Julia would say
when she heard of his misfortune.She would weep and grieve; and he
was sad when he thought of her.But she would be the more rejoiced
when she learned that he was innocent.The triumph would be in
proportion to the trial.On the following day he was brought up for examination.As his name
was called, the propriety of the court was suddenly disturbed by an
exclamation of surprise from an elderly man, with sun-browned face and
monstrous whiskers.almost shouted the elderly man, regardless of the dignity
of the court.An officer was on the point of turning him out; but his earnest manner
saved him.Wake, he questioned him in
regard to the youthful prisoner.muttered the elderly man, in the
most intense excitement.Harry had a friend who had not been idle,
as the sequel will show.Wake first testified to the facts we have already related, and the
lawyer, whom Harry's friends had provided, questioned him in regard to
the prisoner's character and antecedents.He was subjected to a severe cross-examination by Harry's
counsel, in which he repeatedly denied that he had ever borrowed or
paid any money to the accused.While the events preceding Harry's
arrest were transpiring, he had been absent from the city, but had
returned early in the afternoon.He disagreed with his partner in
relation to our hero's guilt, and immediately set himself to work to
unmask the conspiracy, for such he was persuaded it was.He testified that, a short time before, Edward had requested him to
pay him his salary two days before it was due, assigning as a reason
the fact that he owed Harry five dollars, which he wished to pay.He
produced two of the marked half dollars, which he had received from
Edward's landlady.Of course, Edward was utterly confounded; and, to add to his
confusion, he was immediately called to the stand again.This time his
coolness was gone; he crossed himself a dozen times, and finally
acknowledged, under the pressure of the skillful lawyer's close
questioning, that Harry was innocent.He had paid him the money found
in Mrs.Flint's possession, and had slipped the coins wrapped in the
shop bills into his pocket when he took him by the collar on his
return from the office.He had known for some time that the partners were on the watch for the
thief.He had heard them talking about the matter; but he supposed he
had managed the case so well as to exonerate himself and implicate
Harry, whom he hated for being a good boy.His heart swelled with gratitude for the kindly
interposition of Providence.The trial was past--the triumph had come.Wade, and other friends, congratulated him on the happy
termination of the affair; and while they were so engaged the elderly
man elbowed his way through the crowd to the place where Harry stood."Young man, what is your father's name?"he asked, in tones tremulous
with emotion."You had a father--what was his name?""Franklin West; a carpenter by trade.He went from Redfield to
Valparaiso when I was very young, and we never heard anything from
him."exclaimed the stranger, grasping our hero by the hand, while
the tears rolled down his brown visage.Harry did not know what to make of this announcement."Is it possible that you are my father?""I am, Harry; but I was sure you were dead.I got a letter, informing
me that your mother and the baby had gone; and about a year after I
met a man from Rockville who told me that you had died also."They continued the conversation as they walked from the court room to
the store.There was a long story for each to tell.West confessed
that, for two years after his arrival at Valparaiso, he had
accomplished very little.He drank hard, and brought on a fever, which
had nearly carried him off.But that fever was a blessing in disguise;
and since his recovery he had been entirely temperate.He had nothing
to send to his family, and shame prevented him from even writing to
his wife.He received the letter which conveyed the intelligence of
the death of his wife and child, and soon after learned that his
remaining little one was also gone.Carpenters were then in great demand in Valparaiso.He was soon in a
condition to take contracts, and fortune smiled upon him.He had
rendered himself independent, and had now returned to spend his
remaining days in his native land.He had been in Boston a week, and
happened to stray into the Police Court, where he had found the son
who, he supposed, had long ago been laid in the grave.Edward Flint finished his career of "fashionable dissipation" by being
sentenced to the house of correction.Just before he was sent over, he
confessed to Mr.Wade that it was he who had stolen Harry's money,
three years before.The next day Harry obtained leave of absence, for the purpose of
accompanying his father on a visit to Redfield.He was in exuberant
spirits.It seemed as though his cup of joy was full.He could hardly
realize that he had a father--a kind, affectionate father--who shared
the joy of his heart.They went to Redfield; but I cannot stop to tell my readers how
astonished Squire Walker, and Mr.Nason, and the paupers were, to see
the spruce young clerk come to his early home, attended by his
father--a rich father, too.We can follow our hero no farther through the highways and byways of
his life-pilgrimage.We have seen him struggle like a hero through
trial and temptation, and come off conqueror in the end.He has found
a rich father, who crowns his lot with plenty; but his true wealth is
in those good principles which the trials, no less than the triumphs,
of his career have planted in his soul.CHAPTER XXI

IN WHICH HARRY IS VERY PLEASANTLY SITUATED, AND THE STORY COMES TO AN
END


Perhaps my young readers will desire to know something of Harry's
subsequent life; and we will "drop in" upon him at his pleasant
residence in Rockville, without the formality of an introduction.The
years have elapsed since we parted with him, after his triumphant
discharge from arrest.His father did not live long after his return
to his native land, and when he was twenty-one, Harry came into
possession of a handsome fortune.But even wealth could not tempt him
to choose a life of idleness; and he went into partnership with Mr.Wade, the senior retiring at the same time.The firm of Wade and West
is quite as respectable as any in the city.Harry is not a slave to business; and he spends a portion of his time
at his beautiful place in Rockville; for the cars pass through the
village, which is only a ride of an hour and a half from the city.West's house is situated on a gentle eminence not far distant from
the turnpike road.It is built upon the very spot where the cabin of
the charcoal burners stood, in which Harry, the fugitive, passed two
nights.The aspect of the place is entirely changed, though the very
rock upon which our hero ate the sumptuous repast the little angel
brought him may be seen in the centre of the beautiful garden, by the
side of the house.West often seats himself there to think of the
events of the past, and to treasure up the pleasant memories connected
with the vicinity.The house is elegant and spacious, though there is nothing gaudy or
gay about it.It is plainly furnished, though the
articles are rich and tasteful.Who is that
beautiful lady sitting at the piano-forte?Do you not recognize her,
gentle reader?West, and an old
acquaintance.She is no longer the little angel, though I cannot tell
her height or her weight; but her husband thinks she is just as much
of an angel now as when she fed him on doughnuts upon the flat rock in
the garden.He is a fine-looking man, rather tall; and
though he does not wear a mustache, I have no doubt Mrs.West thinks
he is handsome--which is all very well, provided he does not think so
himself."This is a capital day, Julia; suppose we ride over to Redfield, and
see friend Nason," said Mr.The horse is ordered; and as they ride along, the gentleman amuses his
wife with the oft-repeated story of his flight from Jacob Wire's."Do you see that high rock, Julia?""That is the very one where I dodged Leman, and took the back track;
and there is where I knocked the bull-dog over."It is a pleasant little
cottage, for he is no longer in the service of the town.Connected with it is a fine farm of
twenty acres.Nason by his
protege, though no money was paid.Harry would have made it a free
gift, if the pride of his friend would have permitted; but it amounts
to the same thing.West and his lady are warmly welcomed by Mr.The ex-keeper is an old man now.He is a member of the church, and
considered an excellent and useful citizen.West
his "boy," and regards him with mingled pride and admiration.Our friends dine at the cottage; and, after dinner, Mr.West talk over old times, ride down to Pine Pleasant, and visit the
poorhouse.Squire Walker, Jacob
Wire, and most of the paupers who were the companions of our hero, are
dead and gone, and the living speak gently of the departed.At Pine Pleasant, they fasten the horse to a tree, and cross over to
the rock which was Harry's favorite resort in childhood."By the way, Harry, have you heard anything of Ben Smart lately?""After his discharge from the state prison, I heard that he went to
sea."They say she never smiled after she
gave him up as a hopeless case."I pity a mother whose son turns out badly.In their absence, a letter for Julia from Katy Flint
has arrived.Joe is a
steady man, and, with Harry's assistance, has purchased an interest in
the stable formerly kept by Major Phillips, who has retired on a
competency.asked Harry, as she broke the seal."Yes; he has just been sent to the Maryland penitentiary for
housebreaking.""Katy says her mother feels very badly about it."Flint is an excellent woman; she was a mother to
me.""She says they are coming up to Rockville next week.""Glad of that; they will always be welcome beneath my roof.I must
call upon them to-morrow when I go to the city.""Do; and give my love to them."And, here, reader, I must leave them--not without regret, I confess,
for it is always sad to part with warm and true-hearted friends; but
if one must leave them, it is pleasant to know that they are happy,
and are surrounded by all the blessings which make life desirable, and
filled with that bright hope which reaches beyond the perishable
things of this world.It is cheering to know that one's friends, after
they have fought a hard battle with foes without and foes within, have
won the victory, and are receiving their reward.If my young friends think well of Harry, let me admonish them to
imitate his virtues, especially his perseverance in trying to do well;
and when they fail to be as good and true as they wish to be, to TRY
AGAIN.THE END

       *       *       *       *       *


NOVELS WORTH READING

RETAIL PRICE, TEN CENTS A COPY

Magazine size, paper-covered novels.List of titles contains the very best sellers of popular
fiction.Printed from new plates; type clear, clean and readable._The following books are ready to deliver:_

Treasure Island        By Robert Louis Stevenson

King Solomon's Mines   "  H. Rider Haggard

Meadow Brook           "  Mary J. Holmes

Old Mam'selle's Secret "  E. Marlitt

By Woman's Wit         "  Mrs.Alexander

Tempest and Sunshine   "  Mary J. Holmes

_Other titles in preparation_

       *       *       *       *       *


CHILDREN'S COLOR BOOKS

RETAIL PRICE, FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY

Books for children that are not only picture books but play books.Books that children can cut out,
paint or puzzle over._The following books are ready to deliver:_

The Painting Book--Post Cards

The Scissors Book--Our Army

The Scissors Book--Dolls of All Nations

The Puzzle Book--Children's Pets


_Others in preparation_

ASK FOR THE NEW YORK BOOK COMPANY'S

NOVELS WORTH READING AND CHILDREN'S COLOR BOOKS

SOLD BY DEALERS EVERYWHERE

THE NEW YORK BOOK COMPANY

PUBLISHERS, 147 FOURTH AVENUE

NEW YORK, N. Y.*       *       *       *       *


OUR GIRLS BOOKS

RETAIL PRICE, FIFTEEN CENTS EACH

A new series of FICTION FOR GIRLS containing the best books of the
most popular writers of girls' books, of the same interesting, high
class as the Alger Books for Boys, of which we sold a million and a
half copies in 1909._The following books are ready to deliver:_

A Girl from America          By Meade

A Sweet Girl Graduate        "  Meade

A World of Girls             "  Meade

Daddy's Girl                 "  Meade

Polly--A New-Fashioned Girl  "  Meade

Sue--A Little Heroine        "  Meade

The Princess of the Revels   By Meade

The School Queens            "  Meade

Wild Kitty                   "  Meade

Faith Gartney's Girlhood     "  Whitney

Grimm's Tales                "  Grimm

Fairy Tales and Legends      "  Perrault

These will be followed by other titles until the series contains sixty
volumes of the best literature for girls.*       *       *       *       *


FAMOUS FICTION LIBRARY

RETAIL PRICE, FIFTEEN CENTS A VOLUME

A new series of novels, which will contain the great books of the
greatest novelists, in distinctively good-looking cloth-bound volumes,
with attractive new features._The following books are ready to deliver:_


Ten Nights in a Bar Room     By Arthur

Golden Gates                 "  Clay

Two Years Before the Mast    "  Dana

Cast Up by the Tide          "  Delmar

Great Expectations, Vol.1   "  Dickens

Great Expectations, Vol.2   "  Dickens

Beulah                       "  Evans

Inez                         "  Evans

The Baronet's Bride          "  Fleming

Who Wins                     "  Fleming

Staunch as a Woman           "  Garvice

Led by Love                  By Garvice

Aikenside                    "  Holmes

Dora Deane                   "  Holmes

Lena Rivers                  "  Holmes

Soldiers Three               "  Kipling

The Light That Failed        "  Kipling

The Rifle Rangers            "  Reid

Ishmael, Vol.1              "  Southworth

Ishmael, Vol.2              "  Southworth

Self-Raised, Vol.1          "  Southworth

Self-Raised, Vol.2          "  Southworth

Other books of the same high class will follow these until the Library
contains one hundred titles.The size of Our Girls Books series and the Famous Fiction series is
five by seven and a quarter inches; they are printed from new plates,
and bound in cloth with decorated covers.The price is half of the
lowest price at which cloth-bound novels have been sold heretofore,
and the books are better than many of the higher-priced editions.ASK FOR THE N. Y. BOOK CO.'S OUR GIRLS
BOOKS AND FAMOUS FICTION BOOKS.THE NEW YORK BOOK COMPANY

PUBLISHERS, 147 FOURTH AVENUE

NEW YORK, N. Y.Thoughts: Mahomed Akram

   If some day this body of mine were burned
   (It found no favour alas!with you)
   And the ashes scattered abroad, unurned,
   Would Love die also, would Thought die too?But who can answer, or who can trust,
       No dreams would harry the windblown dust?Were I laid away in the furrows deep
   Secure from jackal and passing plough,
   Would your eyes not follow me still through sleep
   Torment me then as they torture now?Would you ever have loved me, Golden Eyes,
       Had I done aught better or otherwise?Was I overspeechful, or did you yearn
   When I sat silent, for songs or speech?Ah, Beloved, I had been so apt to learn,
   So apt, had you only cared to teach.But time for silence and song is done,
       You wanted nothing, my Golden Sun!That drifts in its lonely orbit far
   Away from your soft, effulgent light
   In outer planes of Eternal night?Prayer

   You are all that is lovely and light,
     Aziza whom I adore,
   And, waking, after the night,
     I am weary with dreams of you.Every nerve in my heart is tense and sore
     As I rise to another morning apart from you.I dream of your luminous eyes,
     Aziza whom I adore!Of the ruffled silk of your hair,
   I dream, and the dreams are lies.But I love them, knowing no more
     Will ever be mine of you
   Aziza, my life's despair.I would burn for a thousand days,
   Aziza whom I adore,
   Be tortured, slain, in unheard of ways
     If you pitied the pain I bore.Your bright eyes, fastened on other things,
   Are keener to sting my soul, than scorpion stings!You are all that is lovely to me,
     All that is light,
   One white rose in a Desert of weariness.I only live in the night,
   The night, with its fair false dreams of you,
     You and your loveliness.Give me your love for a day,
             A night, an hour:
           If the wages of sin are Death
             I am willing to pay.What is my life but a breath
       Of passion burning away?O Aziza whom I adore,
     Aziza my one delight,
       Only one night, I will die before day,
     And trouble your life no more.The Aloe

   My life was like an Aloe flower, beneath an orient sky,
   Your sunshine touched it for an hour; it blossomed but to die.Torn up, cast out, on rubbish heaps where red flames work their will
   Each atom of the Aloe keeps the flower-time fragrance still.Memory

   How I loved you in your sleep,
   With the starlight on your hair!The touch of your lips was sweet,
     Aziza whom I adore,
   I lay at your slender feet,
     And against their soft palms pressed,
   I fitted my face to rest.As winds blow over the sea
     From Citron gardens ashore,
   Came, through your scented hair,
     The breeze of the night to me.My lips grew arid and dry,
     My nerves were tense,
   Though your beauty soothe the eye
     It maddens the sense.Every curve of that beauty is known to me,
   Every tint of that delicate roseleaf skin,
     And these are printed on every atom of me,
   Burnt in on every fibre until I die.And for this, my sin,
   I doubt if ever, though dust I be,
   The dust will lose the desire,
   The torment and hidden fire,
   Of my passionate love for you.Aziza whom I adore,
   My dust will be full of your beauty, as is the blue
   And infinite ocean full of the azure sky.In the light that waxed and waned
   Playing about your slumber in silver bars,
   As the palm trees swung their feathery fronds athwart the stars,
   How quiet and young you were,
   Pale as the Champa flowers, violet veined,
   That, sweet and fading, lay in your loosened hair.How sweet you were in your sleep,
   With the starlight on your hair!Your throat thrown backwards, bare,
   And touched with circling moonbeams, silver white
     On the couch's sombre shade.O Aziza my one delight,
   When Youth's passionate pulses fade,
   And his golden heart beats slow,
   When across the infinite sky
   I see the roseate glow
   Of my last, last sunset flare,
   I shall send my thoughts to this night
   And remember you as I die,
   The one thing, among all the things of this earth, found fair.How sweet you were in your sleep,
   With the starlight, silver and sable, across your hair!The First Lover

   As o'er the vessel's side she leant,
     She saw the swimmer in the sea
   With eager eyes on her intent,
     "Come down, come down and swim with me."So weary was she of her lot,
     Tired of the ship's monotony,
   She straightway all the world forgot
     Save the young swimmer in the sea

   So when the dusky, dying light
     Left all the water dark and dim,
   She softly, in the friendly night,
     Slipped down the vessel's side to him.Intent and brilliant, brightly dark,
     She saw his burning, eager eyes,
   And many a phosphorescent spark
     About his shoulders fall and rise.As through the hushed and Eastern night
     They swam together, hand in hand,
   Or lay and laughed in sheer delight
     Full length upon the level sand."Ah, soft, delusive, purple night
     Whose darkness knew no vexing moon!Ah, cruel, needless, dawning light
     That trembled in the sky too soon!"Khan Zada's Song on the Hillside

   The fires that burn on all the hills
     Light up the landscape grey,
   The arid desert land distills
     The fervours of the day.The clear white moon sails through the skies
     And silvers all the night,
   I see the brilliance of your eyes
     And need no other light.The death sighs of a thousand flowers
     The fervent day has slain
   Are wafted through the twilight hours,
     And perfume all the plain.My senses strain, and try to clasp
     Their sweetness in the air,
   In vain, in vain; they only grasp
     The fragrance of your hair.The plain is endless space expressed;
     Vast is the sky above,
   I only feel, against your breast,
     Infinities of love.Deserted Gipsy's Song: Hillside Camp

   She is glad to receive your turquoise ring,
         Dear and dark-eyed Lover of mine!I, to have given you everything:
         Beauty maddens the soul like Wine."She is proud to have held aloof her charms,
         Slender, dark-eyed Lover of mine!But I, of the night you lay in my arms:
         Beauty maddens the sense like Wine!"She triumphs to think that your heart is won,
         Stately, dark-eyed Lover of mine!I had not a thought of myself, not one:
         Beauty maddens the brain like Wine!"She will speak you softly, while skies are blue,
         Dear, deluded Lover of mine!I would lose both body and soul for you:
         Beauty maddens the brain like Wine!"While the ways are fair she will love you well,
         Dear, disdainful Lover of mine!But I would have followed you down to Hell:
         Beauty maddens the soul like Wine!"Though you lay at her feet the days to be,
         Now no longer Lover of mine!You can give her naught that you gave not me:
         Beauty maddened my soul like Wine!"When the years have shown what is false or true:
         Beauty maddens the sight like Wine!You will understand how I cared for you,
         First and only Lover of mine!"The Plains

               How one loves them
   These wide horizons; whether Desert or Sea,--
          Vague and vast and infinite; faintly clear--
   Surely, hid in the far away, unknown "There,"
          Lie the things so longed for and found not, found not, Here.Only where some passionate, level land
          Stretches itself in reaches of golden sand,
   Only where the sea line is joined to the sky-line, clear,
          Beyond the curve of ripple or white foamed crest,--
                         Shall the weary eyes
             Distressed by the broken skies,--
             Broken by Minaret, mountain, or towering tree,--
          Shall the weary eyes be assuaged,--be assuaged,--and rest."Lost Delight"

   After the Hazara War

   I lie alone beneath the Almond blossoms,
        Where we two lay together in the spring,
   And now, as then, the mountain snows are melting,
        This year, as last, the water-courses sing.That was another spring, and other flowers,
        Hung, pink and fragile, on the leafless tree,
   The land rejoiced in other running water,
        And I rejoiced, because you were with me.You, with your soft eyes, darkly lashed and shaded,
        Your red lips like a living, laughing rose,
   Your restless, amber limbs so lithe and slender
        Now lost to me.You lay beside me singing in the sunshine;
        The rough, white fur, unloosened at the neck,
   Showed the smooth skin, fair as the Almond blossoms,
        On which the sun could find no flaw or fleck.I lie alone, beneath the Almond flowers,
        I hated them to touch you as they fell.worse, Ah, worse, who loves you?(My soul is burning as men burn in Hell.)How I have sought you in the crowded cities!I have been mad, they say, for many days.I know not how I came here, to the valley,
        What fate has led me, through what doubtful ways.Somewhere I see my sword has done good service,
        Some one I killed, who, smiling, used your name,
   But in what country?Nay, I have forgotten,
        All thought is shrivelled in my heart's hot flame.Where are you now, Delight, and where your beauty,
        Your subtle curls, and laughing, changeful face?Bound, bruised and naked (dear God, grant me patience),
        And sold in Cabul in the market-place.Among so many captured, sold, or slain,
   What fate was yours?(Ah, dear God, grant me patience,
        My heart is burnt, is burnt, with fire and pain.)my heart is almost breaking,
        My sword is broken and my feet are sore,
   The people look at me and say in passing,
        "He will not leave the village any more."For as the evening falls, the fever rises,
        With frantic thoughts careering through the brain,
   Wild thoughts of you.(Ah, dear God, grant me patience,
        My soul is hurt beyond all men call pain.)I lie alone, beneath the Almond blossoms,
        And see the white snow melting on the hills
   Till Khorassan is gay with water-courses,
        Glad with the tinkling sound of running rills,

   And well I know that when the fragile petals
        Fall softly, ere the first green leaves appear,
   (Ah, for these last few days, God, grant me patience,)
        Since Delight is not, I shall not be, here!Unforgotten

   Do you ever think of me?you who died
       Ere our Youth's first fervour chilled,
   With your soft eyes and your pulses stilled
       Lying alone, aside,
   Do you ever think of me, left in the light,
   From the endless calm of your dawnless night?I am faithful always: I do not say
       That the lips which thrilled to your lips of old
   To lesser kisses are always cold;
       Had you wished for this in its narrow sense
       Our love perhaps had been less intense;
   But as we held faithfulness, you and I,
       I am faithful always, as you who lie,
       Asleep for ever, beneath the grass,
       While the days and nights and the seasons pass,--
           Pass away.I keep your memory near my heart,
       My brilliant, beautiful guiding Star,
   Till long live over, I too depart
       To the infinite night where perhaps you are.I would rather know you alive in Hell
   Than think your beauty is nothing now,
   With its deep dark eyes and tranquil brow
   Where the hair fell softly.Can this be true
   That nothing, nowhere, exists of you?Nothing, nowhere, oh, loved so well
       I have _never_ forgotten.Do you still keep
   Thoughts of me through your dreamless sleep?lost in Eternal Night,
       Lost Star of light,
   Risen splendidly, set so soon,
       Through the weariness of life's afternoon
             I dream of your memory yet.My loved and lost, whom I could not save,
   My youth went down with you to the grave,
   Though other planets and stars may rise,
   I dream of your soft and sorrowful eyes
           And I cannot forget.Song of Faiz Ulla

   Just at the time when Jasmins bloom, most sweetly in the summer weather,
   Lost in the scented Jungle gloom, one sultry night we spent together
   We, Love and Night, together blent, a Trinity of tranced content.Yet, while your lips were wholly mine, to kiss, to drink from, to caress,
   We heard some far-off faint distress; harsh drop of poison in sweet wine
   Lessening the fulness of delight,--
            Some quivering note of human pain,
   Which rose and fell and rose again, in plaintive sobs throughout the night,

   Spoiling the perfumed, moonless hours
   We spent among the Jasmin flowers.Story of Lilavanti

   They lay the slender body down
     With all its wealth of wetted hair,
   Only a daughter of the town,
     But very young and slight and fair.The eyes, whose light one cannot see,
     Are sombre doubtless, like the tresses,
   The mouth's soft curvings seem to be
     A roseate series of caresses.And where the skin has all but dried
     (The air is sultry in the room)
   Upon her breast and either side,
     It shows a soft and amber bloom.By women here, who knew her life,
     A leper husband, I am told,
   Took all this loveliness to wife
     When it was barely ten years old.And when the child in shocked dismay
     Fled from the hated husband's care
   He caught and tied her, so they say,
     Down to his bedside by her hair.To some low quarter of the town,
     Escaped a second time, she flew;
   Her beauty brought her great renown
     And many lovers here she knew,

   When, as the mystic Eastern night
     With purple shadow filled the air,
   Behind her window framed in light,
     She sat with jasmin in her hair.At last she loved a youth, who chose
     To keep this wild flower for his own,
   He in his garden set his rose
     Where it might bloom for him alone.Cholera came; her lover died,
     Want drove her to the streets again,
   And women found her there, who tried
     To turn her beauty into gain.But she who in those garden ways
     Had learnt of Love, would now no more
   Be bartered in the market place
     For silver, as in days before.That former life she strove to change;
     She sold the silver off her arms,
   While all the world grew cold and strange
     To broken health and fading charms.Till, finding lovers, but no friend,
     Nor any place to rest or hide,
   She grew despairing at the end,
     Slipped softly down a well and died.And yet, how short, when all is said,
     This little life of love and tears!Her age, they say, beside her bed,
     To-day is only fifteen years.The Garden by the Bridge

   The Desert sands are heated, parched and dreary,
     The tigers rend alive their quivering prey
   In the near Jungle; here the kites rise, weary,
     Too gorged with living food to fly away.All night the hungry jackals howl together
     Over the carrion in the river bed,
   Or seize some small soft thing of fur or feather
     Whose dying shrieks on the night air are shed.I hear from yonder Temple in the distance
     Whose roof with obscene carven Gods is piled,
   Reiterated with a sad insistence
     Sobs of, perhaps, some immolated child.Strange rites here, where the archway's shade is deeper,
     Are consummated in the river bed;
   Parias steal the rotten railway sleeper
     To burn the bodies of their cholera dead.But yet, their lust, their hunger, cannot shame them
     Goaded by fierce desire, that flays and stings;
   Poor beasts, and poorer men.Blame the Inherent Cruelty of Things.The world is horrible and I am lonely,
     Let me rest here where yellow roses bloom
   And find forgetfulness, remembering only
     Your face beside me in the scented gloom.I am not here for passion,
     I crave no love, only a little rest,
   Although I would my face lay, lover's fashion,
     Against the tender coolness of your breast.I am so weary of the Curse of Living
     The endless, aimless torture, tumult, fears.Surely, if life were any God's free giving,
     He, seeing His gift, long since went blind with tears.Seeing us; our fruitless strife, our futile praying,
     Our luckless Present and our bloodstained Past.Poor players, who make a trick or two in playing,
     But know that death _must_ win the game at last.As round the Fowler, red with feathered slaughter,
     The little joyous lark, unconscious, sings,--
   As the pink Lotus floats on azure water,
     Innocent of the mud from whence it springs.You walk through life, unheeding all the sorrow,
     The fear and pain set close around your way,
   Meeting with hopeful eyes each gay to-morrow,
     Living with joy each hour of glad to-day.I love to have you thus (nay, dear, lie quiet,
     How should these reverent fingers wrong your hair?)So calmly careless of the rush and riot
     That rages round is seething everywhere.You think your beauty
     Does but inflame my senses to desire,
   Till all you hold as loyalty and duty,
     Is shrunk and shrivelled in the ardent fire.You wrong me, wearied out with thought and grieving
     As though the whole world's sorrow eat my heart,
   I come to gaze upon your face believing
     Its beauty is as ointment to the smart.Lie still and let me in my desolation
     Caress the soft loose hair a moment's span.Since Loveliness is Life's one Consolation,
     And love the only Lethe left to man.Ah, give me here beneath the trees in flower,
     Beside the river where the fireflies pass,
   One little dusky, all consoling hour
     Lost in the shadow of the long grown grass

   Give me, oh you whose arms are soft and slender,
     Whose eyes are nothing but one long caress,
   Against your heart, so innocent and tender,
     A little Love and some Forgetfulness.Fate Knows no Tears

   Just as the dawn of Love was breaking
          Across the weary world of grey,
   Just as my life once more was waking
          As roses waken late in May,
   Fate, blindly cruel and havoc-making,
          Stepped in and carried you away.Memories have I none in keeping
          Of times I held you near my heart,
   Of dreams when we were near to weeping
          That dawn should bid us rise and part;
   Never, alas, I saw you sleeping
          With soft closed eyes and lips apart,

   Breathing my name still through your dreaming.--
          Ah!But Fate, unheeding human scheming,
          Serenely reckless came between--
   Fate with her cold eyes hard and gleaming
          Unseared by all the sorrow seen.well-beloved, I never told you,
          I did not show in speech or song,
   How at the end I longed to fold you
          Close in my arms; so fierce and strong
   The longing grew to have and hold you,
          You, and you only, all life long.They who know nothing call me fickle,
          Keen to pursue and loth to keep.Ah, could they see these tears that trickle
          From eyes erstwhile too proud to weep.Could see me, prone, beneath the sickle,
          While pain and sorrow stand and reap!Unopened scarce, yet overblown, lie
          The hopes that rose-like round me grew,
   The lights are low, and more than lonely
          This life I lead apart from you.I want you only,
          And you who loved me never knew.You loved me, pleaded for compassion
          On all the pain I would not share;
   And I in weary, halting fashion
          Was loth to listen, long to care;
   But now, dear God!I faint with passion
          For your far eyes and distant hair.Yes, I am faint with love, and broken
          With sleepless nights and empty days;
   I want your soft words fiercely spoken,
          Your tender looks and wayward ways--
   Want that strange smile that gave me token
          Of many things that no man says.Cold was I, weary, slow to waken
          Till, startled by your ardent eyes,
   I felt the soul within me shaken
          And long-forgotten senses rise;
   But in that moment you were taken,
          And thus we lost our Paradise!Farewell, we may not now recover
          That golden "Then" misspent, passed by,
   We shall not meet as loved and lover
          Here, or hereafter, you and I.
   My time for loving you is over,
          Love has no future, but to die.And thus we part, with no believing
          In any chance of future years.We have no idle self-deceiving,
          No half-consoling hopes and fears;
   We know the Gods grant no retrieving
          A wasted chance.Verses: Faiz Ulla

   Just in the hush before dawn
   A little wistful wind is born.A little chilly errant breeze,
   That thrills the grasses, stirs the trees.And, as it wanders on its way,
   While yet the night is cool and dark,
   The first carol of the lark,--
   Its plaintive murmurs seem to say
   "I wait the sorrows of the day."Two Songs by Sitara, of Kashmir

   Beloved!your hair was golden
   As tender tints of sunrise,
   As corn beside the River
         In softly varying hues.I loved you for your slightness,
   Your melancholy sweetness,
   Your changeful eyes, that promised
         What your lips would still refuse.You came to me, and loved me,
   Were mine upon the River,
   The azure water saw us
         And the blue transparent sky;
   The Lotus flowers knew it,
   Our happiness together,
   While life was only River,
         Only love, and you and I.

   Love wakened on the River,
   To sounds of running water,
   With silver Stars for witness
         And reflected Stars for light;
   Awakened to existence,
   With ripples for first music
   And sunlight on the River
         For earliest sense of sight.Love grew upon the River
   Among the scented flowers,
   The open rosy flowers
         Of the Lotus buds in bloom--
   Love, brilliant as the Morning,
   More fervent than the Noon-day,
   And tender as the Twilight
         In its blue transparent gloom.Cold snow upon the mountains,
   The Lotus leaves turned yellow
         And the water very grey.Our kisses faint and falter,
   The clinging hands unfasten,
   The golden time is over
         And our passion dies away.To be forgotten,
           A ripple on the River,
           That flashes in the sunset,
           That flashed,--and died away.Second Song: The Girl from Baltistan

                            Throb, throb, throb,
   Far away in the blue transparent Night,
   On the outer horizon of a dreaming consciousness,
   She hears the sound of her lover's nearing boat
               Afar, afloat
   On the river's loneliness, where the Stars are the only light;
      Hear the sound of the straining wood
          Like a broken sob
          Of a heart's distress,
      Loving misunderstood.She lies, with her loose hair spent in soft disorder,
   On a silken sheet with a purple woven border,
   Every cell of her brain is latent fire,
   Every fibre tense with restrained desire.And the straining oars sound clearer, clearer,
          The boat is approaching nearer, nearer;
        "How to wait through the moments' space
        Till I see the light of my lover's face?"Throb, throb, throb,
   The sound dies down the stream
   Till it only clings at the senses' edge
   Like a half-remembered dream.Doubtless, he in the silence lies,
         His fair face turned to the tender skies,
         Starlight touching his sleeping eyes.While his boat caught in the thickset sedge
   And the waters round it gurgle and sob,
         Or floats set free on the river's tide,
                                  Oars laid aside.She is awake and knows no rest,
   Passion dies and is dispossessed
          Of his brief, despotic power.But the Brain, once kindled, would still be afire
   Were the whole world pasture to its desire,
   And all of love, in a single hour,--
   A single wine cup, filled to the brim,
                              Given to slake its thirst.Some there are who are thus-wise cursed
         Times that follow fulfilled desire
         Are of all their hours the worst.They find no Respite and reach no Rest,
   Though passion fail and desire grow dim,
         No assuagement comes from the thing possessed
                      For possession feeds the fire."Oh, for the life of the bright hued things
          Whose marriage and death are one,
        A floating fusion on golden wings."But we who re-marry a thousand times,
          As the spirit or senses will,
        In a thousand ways, in a thousand climes,
          We remain unsatisfied still."As her lover left her, alone, awake she lies,
   With a sleepless brain and weary, half-closed eyes.She turns her face where the purple silk is spread,
   Still sweet with delicate perfume his presence shed.Her arms remembered his vanished beauty still,
   And, reminiscent of clustered curls, her fingers thrill.While the wonderful, Starlit Night wears slowly on
   Till the light of another day, serene and wan,
                              Pierces the eastern skies.Palm Trees by the Sea

   Love, let me thank you for this!Now we have drifted apart,
   Wandered away from the sea,--
     For the fresh touch of your kiss,
   For the young warmth of your heart,
     For your youth given to me.Thanks: for the curls of your hair,
     Softer than silk to the hand,
   For the clear gaze of your eyes.For yourself: delicate, fair,
   Seen as you lay on the sand,
     Under the violet skies.Thanks: for the words that you said,--
     Secretly, tenderly sweet,
   All through the tropical day,
     Till, when the sunset was red,
   I, who lay still at your feet,
     Felt my life ebbing away,

   Weary and worn with desire,
     Only yourself could console.For that fierce fervour and fire
   Burnt through my lips to my soul
     From the white heat of your kiss!You were the essence of Spring,
     Wayward and bright as a flame:
   Though we have drifted apart,
     Still how the syllables sing
   Mixed in your musical name,
     Deep in the well of my heart!Once in the lingering light,
     Thrown from the west on the Sea,
   Laid you your garments aside,
     Slender and goldenly bright,
   Glimmered your beauty, set free,
     Bright as a pearl in the tide.Once, ere the thrill of the dawn
     Silvered the edge of the sea,
   I, who lay watching you rest,--
     Pale in the chill of the morn
   Found you still dreaming of me
     Stilled by love's fancies possessed.Fallen on sorrowful days,
     Love, let me thank you for this,
   You were so happy with me!Wrapped in Youth's roseate haze,
   Wanting no more than my kiss
     By the blue edge of the sea!Ah, for those nights on the sand
     Under the palms by the sea,
   For the strange dream of those days
     Spent in the passionate land,
   For your youth given to me,
     I am your debtor always!Song by Gulbaz

   "Is it safe to lie so lonely when the summer twilight closes
   No companion maidens, only you asleep among the roses?"Thirteen, fourteen years you number, and your hair is soft and scented,
   Perilous is such a slumber in the twilight all untented."Lonely loveliness means danger, lying in your rose-leaf nest,
   What if some young passing stranger broke into your careless rest?"But she would not heed the warning, lay alone serene and slight,
   Till the rosy spears of morning slew the darkness of the night.Young love, walking softly, found her, in the scented, shady closes,
   Threw his ardent arms around her, kissed her lips beneath the roses.And she said, with smiles and blushes, "Would that I had sooner known!Never now the morning thrushes wake and find me all alone."Since you said the rose-leaf cover sweet protection gave, but slight,
   I have found this dear young lover to protect me through the night!"Kashmiri Song

   Pale hands I love beside the Shalimar,
     Where are you now?Whom do you lead on Rapture's roadway, far,
     Before you agonise them in farewell?Oh, pale dispensers of my Joys and Pains,
     Holding the doors of Heaven and of Hell,
   How the hot blood rushed wildly through the veins
     Beneath your touch, until you waved farewell.Pale hands, pink tipped, like Lotus buds that float
     On those cool waters where we used to dwell,
   I would have rather felt you round my throat,
     Crushing out life, than waving me farewell!Reverie of Ormuz the Persian

   Softly the feathery Palm-trees fade in the violet Distance,
   Faintly the lingering light touches the edge of the sea,
   Sadly the Music of Waves, drifts, faint as an Anthem's insistence,
   Heard in the aisles of a dream, over the sandhills, to me.Now that the Lights are reversed, and the Singing changed into sighing,
   Now that the wings of our fierce, fugitive passion are furled,
   Take I unto myself, all alone in the light that is dying,
   Much of the sorrow that lies hid at the Heart of the World.Sad am I, sad for your loss: for failing the charm of your presence,
   Even the sunshine has paled, leaving the Zenith less blue.Even the ocean lessens the light of its green opalescence,
   Since, to my sorrow I loved, loved and grew weary of, you.Why was our passion so fleeting, why had the flush of your beauty
   Only so slender a spell, only so futile a power?Yet, even thus ever is life, save when long custom or duty
   Moulds into sober fruit Love's fragile and fugitive flower.Fain would my soul have been faithful; never an alien pleasure
   Lured me away from the light lit in your luminous eyes,
   But we have altered the World as pitiful man has leisure
   To criticise, balance, take counsel, assuredly lies.All through the centuries Man has gathered his flower, and fenced it,
   --Infinite strife to attain; infinite struggle to keep,--
   Holding his treasure awhile, all Fate and all forces against it,
   Knowing it his no more, if ever his vigilance sleep.But we have altered the World as pitiful man has grown stronger,
   So that the things we love are as easily kept as won,
   Therefore the ancient fight can engage and detain us no longer,
   And all too swiftly, alas, passion is over and done.Far too speedily now we can gather the coveted treasure,
   Enjoy it awhile, be satiated, begin to tire;
   And what shall be done henceforth with the profitless after-leisure,
   Who has the breath to kindle the ash of a faded fire?After my ardent endeavour
   Came the delirious Joy, flooding my life like a sea,
   Days of delight that are burnt on the brain for ever and ever,
   Days and nights when you loved, before you grew weary of me.Softly the sunset decreases dim in the violet Distance,
   Even as Love's own fervour has faded away from me,
   Leaving the weariness, the monotonous Weight of Existence,--
   All the farewells in the world weep in the sound of the sea.Sunstroke

   Oh, straight, white road that runs to meet,
            Across green fields, the blue green sea,
   You knew the little weary feet
            Of my child bride that was to be!Her people brought her from the shore
            One golden day in sultry June,
   And I stood, waiting, at the door,
            Praying my eyes might see her soon.With eager arms, wide open thrown,
            Now never to be satisfied!Ere I could make my love my own
            She closed her amber eyes and died.they took no heed
            How frail she was, my little one,
   But brought her here with cruel speed
            Beneath the fierce, relentless sun.We laid her on the marriage bed
            The bridal flowers in her hand,
   A maiden from the ocean led
            Only, alas!I walk alone; the air is sweet,
            The white road wanders to the sea,
   I dream of those two little feet
            That grew so tired in reaching me.Adoration

   Who does not feel desire unending
     To solace through his daily strife,
   With some mysterious Mental Blending,
     The hungry loneliness of life?Until, by sudden passion shaken,
     As terriers shake a rat at play,
   He finds, all blindly, he has taken
     The old, Hereditary way.Yet, in the moment of communion,
     The very heart of passion's fire,
   His spirit spurns the mortal union,
     "Not this, not this, the Soul's desire!"*        *        *        *

   Oh You, by whom my life is riven,
     And reft away from my control,
   Take back the hours of passion given!Although I once, in ardent fashion,
     Implored you long to give me this;
   (In hopes to stem, or stifle, passion)
     Your hair to touch, your lips to kiss

   Now that your gracious self has granted
     The loveliness you hold as naught,
   I find, alas!not that I wanted--
     Possession has not stifled Thought.Desire its aim has only shifted,--
     Built hopes upon another plan,
   And I in love for you have drifted
     Beyond all passion known to man.Beyond all dreams of soft caresses
     The solacing of any kiss,--
   Beyond the fragrance of your tresses
     (Once I had sold my soul for this!)But now I crave no mortal union
     (Thanks for that sweetness in the past);
   I need some subtle, strange communion,
     Some sense that _I_ join _you_, at last.Long past the pulse and pain of passion,
     Long left the limits of all love,--
   I crave some nearer, fuller fashion,
     Some unknown way, beyond, above,--

   Some infinitely inner fusion,
     As Wave with Water; Flame with Fire,--
   Let me dream once the dear delusion
     That I am You, Oh, Heart's Desire!Your kindness lent to my caresses
     That beauty you so lightly prize,--
   The midnight of your sable tresses,
     The twilight of your shadowed eyes.Ah, for that gift all thanks are given!Yet, Oh, adored, beyond control,
   Count all the passionate past forgiven
     And love me once, once, from your soul.Three Songs of Zahir-u-Din

   The tropic day's redundant charms
     Cool twilight soothes away,
   The sun slips down behind the palms
     And leaves the landscape grey.I want to take you in my arms
           And kiss your lips away!I wake with sunshine in my eyes
     And find the morning blue,
   A night of dreams behind me lies
     And all were dreams of you!Ah, how I wish the while I rise,
           That what I dream were true.The weary day's laborious pace,
     I hasten and beguile
   By fancies, which I backwards trace
     To things I loved erstwhile;
           The weary sweetness of your face,
           Your faint, illusive smile.The silken softness of your hair
     Where faint bronze shadows are,
   Your strangely slight and youthful air,
     No passions seem to mar,--
           Oh, why, since Fate has made you fair,
           Must Fortune keep you far?Thus spent, the day so long and bright
     Less hot and brilliant seems,
   Till in a final flare of light
     The sun withdraws his beams.Then, in the coolness of the night,
           I meet you in my dreams!Second Song

   How much I loved that way you had
   Of smiling most, when very sad,
   A smile which carried tender hints
       Of delicate tints
       And warbling birds,
       Of sun and spring,
   And yet, more than all other thing,
   Of Weariness beyond all Words!None other ever smiled that way,
       None that I know,--
   The essence of all Gaiety lay,
   Of all mad mirth that men may know,
   In that sad smile, serene and slow,
   That on your lips was wont to play.It needed many delicate lines
   And subtle curves and roseate tints
   To make that weary radiant smile;
   It flickered, as beneath the vines
   The sunshine through green shadow glints
   On the pale path that lies below,
   Flickered and flashed, and died away,
   But the strange thoughts it woke meanwhile
       Were wont to stay.Thoughts of Strange Things you used to know
   In dim, dead lives, lived long ago,
   Some madly mirthful Merriment
   Whose lingering light is yet unspent,--
   Some unimaginable Woe,--
   Your strange, sad smile forgets these not,
   Though you, yourself, long since, forgot!Third Song, written during Fever

   To-night the clouds hang very low,
       They take the Hill-tops to their breast,
       And lay their arms about the fields.The wind that fans me lying low,
       Restless with great desire for rest,
       No cooling touch of freshness yields.I, sleepless through the stifling heat,
       Watch the pale Lightning's constant glow
       Between the wide set open doors.I lie and long amidst the heat,--
       The fever that my senses know,
       For that cool slenderness of yours.A roseleaf that has lain in snow,
       A snowflake tinged with sunset fire.You do not know, so young you are,
       How Fever fans the senses' glow
       To uncontrollable desire!And fills the spaces of the night
       With furious and frantic thought,
       One would not dare to think by day.Ah, if you came to me to-night
       These visions would be turned to naught,
       These hateful dreams be held at bay!But you are far, and Loneliness
       My only lover through the night;
       And not for any word or prayer
   Would you console my loneliness
       Or lend yourself, serene and slight,
       And the cool clusters of your hair.All through the night I long for you,
       As shipwrecked men in tropics yearn
       For the fresh flow of streams and springs.My fevered fancies follow you
       As dying men in deserts turn
       Their thoughts to clear and chilly things.Such dreams are mine, and such my thirst,
       Unceasing and unsatisfied,
       Until the night is burnt away
   Among these dreams and fevered thirst,
       And, through the open doorways, glide
       The white feet of the coming day.The Regret of the Ranee in the Hall of Peacocks

   This man has taken my Husband's life
     And laid my Brethren low,
   No sister indeed, were I, no wife,
     To pardon and let him go.Yet why does he look so young and slim
     As he weak and wounded lies?How hard for me to be harsh to him
     With his soft, appealing eyes.His hair is ruffled upon the stone
     And the slender wrists are bound,
   So young!and yet he has overthrown
     His scores on the battle ground.Would I were only a slave to-day,
     To whom it were right and meet
   To wash the stains of the War away,
     The dust from the weary feet.Were I but one of my serving girls
     To solace his pain to rest!Shake out the sand from the soft loose curls,
     And hold him against my breast!Would God that I were the senseless stone
     To support his slender length!I hate those wounds that trouble my sight,
     Unknown!how I wish you lay,
   Alone in my silken tent to-night
     While I charmed the pain away.I would lay you down on the Royal bed,
     I would bathe your wounds with wine,
   And setting your feet against my head
     Dream you were lover of mine.My Crown is heavy upon my hair,
     The Jewels weigh on my breast,
   All I would leave, with delight, to share
     Your pale and passionate rest!But hands grow restless about their swords,
     Lips murmur below their breath,
   "The Queen is silent too long!""My Lords,
     --Take him away to death!"Protest: By Zahir-u-Din

   Alas!this wasted Night
   With all its Jasmin-scented air,
   Its thousand stars, serenely bright!I lie alone, and long for you,
   Long for your Champa-scented hair,
   Your tranquil eyes of twilight hue;

   Long for the close-curved, delicate lips
   --Their sinuous sweetness laid on mine--
   Here, where the slender fountain drips,
   Here, where the yellow roses glow,
   Pale in the tender silver shine
   The stars across the garden throw.The poets hardly speak the truth,--
   Despite their praiseful litany,
   His season is not all delights
   Nor every night an ecstasy!The very power and passion that make--
   _Might_ make--his days one golden dream,
   How he must suffer for their sake!Till, in their fierce and futile rage,
   The baffled senses almost deem
   They might be happier in old age.Age that can find red roses sweet,
   And yet not crave a rose-red mouth;
   Hear Bulbuls, with no wish that feet
   Of sweeter singers went his way;
   Inhale warm breezes from the South,
   Yet never fed his fancy stray.From some near Village I can hear
   The cadenced throbbing of a drum,
   Now softly distant, now more near;
   And in an almost human fashion,
   It, plaintive, wistful, seems to come
   Laden with sighs of fitful passion,

   To mock me, lying here alone
   Among the thousand useless flowers
   Upon the fountain's border-stone--
   Cold stone, that chills me as I lie
   Counting the slowly passing hours
   By the white spangles in the sky.Some feast the Tom-toms celebrate,
   Where, close together, side by side,
   Gay in their gauze and tinsel state
   With lips serene and downcast eyes,
   Sit the young bridegroom and his bride,
   While round them songs and laughter rise.They are together; Why are we
   So hopelessly, so far apart?Oh, I implore you, come to me!Come to me, Solace of mine eyes!A little, languid, mocking breeze
   That rustles through the Jasmin flowers
   And stirs among the Tamarind trees;
   A little gurgle of the spray
   That drips, unheard, though silent hours,
   Then breaks in sudden bubbling play.Why, therefore, mock at my repose?Is it my fault I am alone
   Beneath the feathery Tamarind tree
   Whose shadows over me are thrown?Nay, I am mad indeed, with thirst
   For all to me this night denied
   And drunk with longing, and accurst
   Beyond all chance of sleep or rest,
   With love, unslaked, unsatisfied,
   And dreams of beauty unpossessed.Hating the hour that brings you not,
   Mad at the space betwixt us twain,
   Sad for my empty arms, so hot
   And fevered, even the chilly stone
   Can scarcely cool their burning pain,--
   And oh, this sense of being alone!Take hence, O Night, your wasted hours,
   You bring me not my Life's Delight,
   My Star of Stars, my Flower of Flowers!You leave me loveless and forlorn,
   Pass on, most false and futile night,
   Pass on, and perish in the Dawn!Famine Song

   Death and Famine on every side
       And never a sign of rain,
   The bones of those who have starved and died
       Unburied upon the plain.What care have I that the bones bleach white?To-morrow they may be mine,
   But I shall sleep in your arms to-night
       And drink your lips like wine!Cholera, Riot, and Sudden Death,
       And the brave red blood set free,
   The glazing eye and the failing breath,--
       But what are these things to me?Your breath is quick and your eyes are bright
       And your blood is red like wine,
   And I shall sleep in your arms to-night
       And hold your lips with mine!I hear the sound of a thousand tears,
       Like softly pattering rain,
   I see the fever, folly, and fears
       Fulfilling man's tale of pain.But for the moment your star is bright,
       I revel beneath its shine,
   For I shall sleep in your arms to-night
       And feel your lips on mine!And you need not deem me over cold,
       That I do not stop to think
   For all the pleasure this Life may hold
       Is on the Precipice brink.Thought could but lessen my soul's delight,
       And to-day she may not pine.For I shall lie in your arms to-night
       And close your lips with mine!I trust what sorrow the Fates may send
       I may carry quietly through,
   And pray for grace when I reach the end,
       To die as a man should do.To-day, at least, must be clear and bright,
       Without a sorrowful sign,
   Because I sleep in your arms to-night
       And feel your lips on mine!So on I work, in the blazing sun,
       To bury what dead we may,
   But glad, oh, glad, when the day is done
       And the night falls round us grey.Would those we covered away from sight
       Had a rest as sweet as mine!For I shall sleep in your arms to-night
       And drink your lips like wine!The Window Overlooking the Harbour

   Sad is the Evening: all the level sand
     Lies left and lonely, while the restless sea,
   Tired of the green caresses of the land,
     Withdraws into its own infinity.But still more sad this white and chilly Dawn
     Filling the vacant spaces of the sky,
   While little winds blow here and there forlorn
     And all the stars, weary of shining, die.And more than desolate, to wake, to rise,
     Leaving the couch, where softly sleeping still,
   What through the past night made my heaven, lies;
     And looking out across the window sill

   See, from the upper window's vantage ground,
     Mankind slip into harness once again,
   And wearily resume his daily round
     Of love and labour, toil and strife and pain.How the sad thoughts slip back across the night:
     The whole thing seems so aimless and so vain.What use the raptures, passion and delight,
     Burnt out; as though they could not wake again.The worn-out nerves and weary brain repeat
     The question: Whither all these passions tend;--
   This curious thirst, so painful and so sweet,
     So fierce, so very short-lived, to what end?Even, if seeking for ourselves, the Race,
     The only immortality we know,--
   Even if from the flower of our embrace
     Some spark should kindle, or some fruit should grow,

   What were the use?the gain, to us or it,
     That we should cause another You or Me,--
   Another life, from our light passion lit,
     To suffer like ourselves awhile and die.Our being runs
     In a closed circle.All we know or see
   Tends to assure us that a thousand Suns,
     Teeming perchance with life, have ceased to be.Ah, the grey Dawn seems more than desolate,
     And the past night of passion worse than waste,
   Love but a useless flower, that soon or late,
     Turns to a fruit with bitter aftertaste.Youth, even Youth, seems futile and forlorn
     While the new day grows slowly white above.Pale and reproachful comes the chilly Dawn
     After the fervour of a night of love.Back to the Border

   The tremulous morning is breaking
     Against the white waste of the sky,
   And hundreds of birds are awaking
     In tamarisk bushes hard by.I, waiting alone in the station,
     Can hear in the distance, grey-blue,
   The sound of that iron desolation,
     The train that will bear me from you.'T will carry me under your casement,
     You'll feel in your dreams as you lie
   The quiver, from gable to basement,
     The rush of my train sweeping by.And I shall look out as I pass it,--
     Your dear, unforgettable door,
   'T was _ours_ till last night, but alas!it
     Will never be mine any more.Through twilight blue-grey and uncertain,
     Where frost leaves the window-pane free,
   I'll look at the tinsel-edged curtain
     That hid so much pleasure for me.I go to my long undone duty
     Alone in the chill and the gloom,
   My eyes are still full of the beauty
     I leave in your rose-scented room.Lie still in your dreams; for your tresses
     Are free of my lingering kiss.I keep you awake with caresses
     No longer; be happy in this!From passion you told me you hated
     You're now and for ever set free,
   I pass in my train, sorrow-weighted,
     Your house that was Heaven to me.You won't find a trace, when you waken,
     Of me or my love of the past,
   Rise up and rejoice!I have taken
     My longed-for departure at last.My fervent and useless persistence
     You never need suffer again,
   Nor even perceive in the distance
     The smoke of my vanishing train!Reverie: Zahir-u-Din

   Alone, I wait, till her twilight gate
                        The Night slips quietly through,
   With shadow and gloom, and purple bloom,
                        Flung over the Zenith blue.Her stars that tremble, would fain dissemble
                        Light over lovers thrown,--
   Her hush and mystery know no history
                        Such as day may own.Day has record of pleasure and pain,
   But things that are done by Night remain
                        For ever and ever unknown.For a thousand years, 'neath a thousand skies,
                        Night has brought men love;
   Therefore the old, old longings rise
                        As the light grows dim above.Therefore, now that the shadows close,
                        And the mists weird and white,
   While Time is scented with musk and rose;
                        Magic with silver light.I long for love; will you grant me some?as lovers have always come,
                        Through the evenings of the Past.Swiftly, as lovers have always come,
   Softly, as lovers have always come
                        Through the long-forgotten Past.Sea Song

   Against the planks of the cabin side,
       (So slight a thing between them and me,)
   The great waves thundered and throbbed and sighed,
       The great green waves of the Indian sea!Your face was white as the foam is white,
       Your hair was curled as the waves are curled,
   I would we had steamed and reached that night
       The sea's last edge, the end of the world.The wind blew in through the open port,
       So freshly joyous and salt and free,
   Your hair it lifted, your lips it sought,
       And then swept back to the open sea.The engines throbbed with their constant beat;
       Your heart was nearer, and all I heard;
   Your lips were salt, but I found them sweet,
       While, acquiescent, you spoke no word.So straight you lay in your narrow berth,
       Rocked by the waves; and you seemed to be
   Essence of all that is sweet on earth,
       Of all that is sad and strange at sea.And you were white as the foam is white,
       Your hair was curled as the waves are curled.had we but sailed and reached that night,
       The sea's last edge, the end of the world!'T is eight miles out and eight miles in,
        Just at the break of morn.'T is ice without and flame within,
        To gain a kiss at dawn!Far, where the Lilac Hills arise
        Soft from the misty plain,
   A lone enchanted hollow lies
        Where I at last drew rein.Midwinter grips this lonely land,
        This stony, treeless waste,
   Where East, due East, across the sand,
        We fly in fevered haste.the East will soon be red,
        The wild duck westward fly,
   And make above my anxious head,
        Triangles in the sky.Like wind we go; we both are still
        So young; all thanks to Fate!(It cuts like knives, this air so chill,)
        Dear God!Behind us, wrapped in mist and sleep
        The Ruined City lies,
   (Although we race, we seem to creep!)Eight miles out only, eight miles in,
        Good going all the way;
   But more and more the clouds begin
        To redden into day.And every snow-tipped peak grows pink
        An iridescent gem!My heart beats quick, with joy, to think
        How I am nearing them!As mile on mile behind us falls,
        Till, Oh, delight!I see
   My Heart's Desire, who softly calls
        Across the gloom to me.The utter joy of that First Love
        No later love has given,
   When, while the skies grew light above,
        We entered into Heaven.Till I Wake

   When I am dying, lean over me tenderly, softly,
     Stoop, as the yellow roses droop in the wind from the South.So I may, when I wake, if there be an Awakening,
     Keep, what lulled me to sleep, the touch of your lips on my mouth.His Rubies: Told by Valgovind

   Along the hot and endless road,
     Calm and erect, with haggard eyes,
   The prisoner bore his fetters' load
     Beneath the scorching, azure skies.Serene and tall, with brows unbent,
     Without a hope, without a friend,
   He, under escort, onward went,
     With death to meet him at the end.The Poppy fields were pink and gay
     On either side, and in the heat
   Their drowsy scent exhaled all day
     A dream-like fragrance almost sweet.And when the cool of evening fell
     And tender colours touched the sky,
   He still felt youth within him dwell
     And half forgot he had to die.Sometimes at night, the Camp-fires lit
     And casting fitful light around,
   His guard would, friend-like, let him sit
     And talk awhile with them, unbound.Thus they, the night before the last,
     Were resting, when a group of girls
   Across the small encampment passed,
     With laughing lips and scented curls.Then in the Prisoner's weary eyes
     A sudden light lit up once more,
   The women saw him with surprise,
     And pity for the chains he bore.For little women reck of Crime
     If young and fair the criminal be
   Here in this tropic, amorous clime
     Where love is still untamed and free.And one there was, she walked less fast,
     Behind the rest, perhaps beguiled
   By his lithe form, who, as she passed,
     Waited a little while, and smiled.The guard, in kindly Eastern fashion,
     Smiled to themselves, and let her stay.So tolerant of human passion,
     "To love he has but one more day."Yet when (the soft and scented gloom
     Scarce lighted by the dying fire)
   His arms caressed her youth and bloom,
     With him it was not all desire."For me," he whispered, as he lay,
     "But little life remains to live.One thing I crave to take away:
     You have the gift; but will you give?"If I could know some child of mine
     Would live his life, and see the sun
   Across these fields of poppies shine,
     What should I care that mine is done?"To die would not be dying quite,
     Leaving a little life behind,
   You, were you kind to me to-night,
     Could grant me this; but--are you kind?"See, I have something here for you
     For you and It, if It there be."Soft in the gloom her glances grew,
     With gentle tears he could not see.He took the chain from off his neck,
     Hid in the silver chain there lay
   Three rubies, without flaw or fleck.He drew her close; the moonless skies
     Shed little light; the fire was dead.Soft pity filled her youthful eyes,
     And many tender things she said.Throughout the hot and silent night
     All that he asked of her she gave.And, left alone ere morning light,
     He went serenely to the grave,

   Happy; for even when the rope
     Confined his neck, his thoughts were free,
   And centered round his Secret Hope
     The little life that was to be.When Poppies bloomed again, she bore
     His child who gaily laughed and crowed,
   While round his tiny neck he wore
     The rubies given on the road.For his small sake she wished to wait,
     But vainly to forget she tried,
   And grieving for the Prisoner's fate,
     She broke her gentle heart and died.Song of Taj Mahomed

   Dear is my inlaid sword; across the Border
   It brought me much reward; dear is my Mistress,
   The jewelled treasure of an amorous hour.Dear beyond measure are my dreams and Fancies.These I adore; for these I live and labour,
   Holding them more than sword or jewelled Mistress,
   For this indeed may rust, and that prove faithless,
   But, till my limbs are dust, I have my Fancies.The Garden of Kama:

   Kama the Indian Eros

   The daylight is dying,
   The Flying fox flying,
         Amber and amethyst burn in the sky.See, the sun throws a late,
   Lingering, roseate
         Kiss to the landscape to bid it good-bye.Oh, come, unresisting,
         Lovely, expectant, on tentative feet.Shadow shall cover us,
   Roses bend over us,
         Making a bride chamber, sacred and sweet.We know not life's reason,
   The length of its season,
         Know not if they know, the great Ones above.We none of us sought it,
   And few could support it,
         Were it not gilt with the glamour of love.But much is forgiven
   To Gods who have given,
         If but for an hour, the Rapture of Youth.You do not yet know it,
   But Kama shall show it,
         Changing your dreams to his Exquisite Truth.The Fireflies shall light you,
   And naught shall afright you,
         Nothing shall trouble the Flight of the Hours.Come, for I wait for you,
   Night is too late for you,
         Come, while the twilight is closing the flowers.Every breeze still is,
   And, scented with lilies,
         Cooled by the twilight, refreshed by the dew,
   The garden lies breathless,
   Where Kama, the Deathless,
         In the hushed starlight, is waiting for you.Camp Follower's Song, Gomal River

   We have left Gul Kach behind us,
      Are marching on Apozai,--
   Where pleasure and rest are waiting
      To welcome us by and by.We're falling back from the Gomal,
      Across the Gir-dao plain,
   The camping ground is deserted,
      We'll never come back again.Along the rocks and the defiles,
      The mules and the camels wind.Good-bye to Rahimut-Ullah,
      The man who is left behind.For some we lost in the skirmish,
      And some were killed in the fight,
   But he was captured by fever,
      In the sentry pit, at night.A rifle shot had been swifter,
      Less trouble a sabre thrust,
   But his Fate decided fever,
      And each man dies as he must.The wavering flames rise high,
   The flames of our burning grass-huts,
      Against the black of the sky.We hear the sound of the river,
      An ever-lessening moan,
   The hearts of us all turn backwards
      To where he is left alone.We sing up a little louder,
      We know that we feel bereft,
   We're leaving the camp together,
      And only one of us left.The only one, out of many,
      And each must come to his end,
   I wish I could stop this singing,
      He happened to be my friend.We're falling back from the Gomal
      We're marching on Apozai,
   And pleasure and rest are waiting
      To welcome us by and by.Perhaps the feast will taste bitter,
      The lips of the girls less kind,--
   Because of Rahimut-Ullah,
      The man who is left behind!Song of the Colours: by Taj Mahomed

   _Rose-colour_
   Rose Pink am I, the colour gleams and glows
     In many a flower; her lips, those tender doors
   By which, in time of love, love's essence flows
     From him to her, are dyed in delicate Rose.Mine is the earliest Ruby light that pours
     Out of the East, when day's white gates unclose.On downy peach, and maiden's downier cheek
     I, in a flush of radiant bloom, alight,
   Clinging, at sunset, to the shimmering peak
     I veil its snow in floods of Roseate light._Azure_
   Mine is the heavenly hue of Azure skies,
     Where the white clouds lie soft as seraphs' wings,
   Mine the sweet, shadowed light in innocent eyes,
     Whose lovely looks light only on lovely things.Mine the Blue Distance, delicate and clear,
     Mine the Blue Glory of the morning sea,
   All that the soul so longs for, finds not here,
     Fond eyes deceive themselves, and find in me.to the Royal Red of living Blood,
     Let loose by steel in spirit-freeing flood,
   Forced from faint forms, by toil or torture torn
     Staining the patient gates of life new born.Colour of War and Rage, of Pomp and Show,
     Banners that flash, red flags that flaunt and glow,
   Colour of Carnage, Glory, also Shame,
     Raiment of women women may not name.I hide in mines, where unborn Rubies dwell,
     Flicker and flare in fitful fire in Hell,
   The outpressed life-blood of the grape is mine,
     Hail!Strong am I, over strong, to eyes that tire,
     In the hot hue of Rapine, Riot, Flame.Death and Despair are black, War and Desire,
     The two red cards in Life's unequal game._Green_
   I am the Life of Forests, and Wandering Streams,
     Green as the feathery reeds the Florican love,
   Young as a maiden, who of her marriage dreams,
     Still sweetly inexperienced in ways of Love.Colour of Youth and Hope, some waves are mine,
     Some emerald reaches of the evening sky.See, in the Spring, my sweet green Promise shine,
     Never to be fulfilled, of by and by.Never to be fulfilled; leaves bud, and ever
     Something is wanting, something falls behind;
   The flowered Solstice comes indeed, but never
     That light and lovely summer men divined._Violet_
   I were the colour of Things, (if hue they had)
         That are hard to name.Of curious, twisted thoughts that men call "mad"
         Or oftener "shame."Of that delicate vice, that is hardly vice,
         So reticent, rare,
   Ethereal, as the scent of buds and spice,
         In this Eastern air.On palm-fringed shores I colour the Cowrie shell,
         With its edges curled;
   And, deep in Datura poison buds, I dwell
         In a perfumed world.My lilac tinges the edge of the evening sky
         Where the sunset clings.My purple lends an Imperial Majesty
         To the robes of kings._Yellow_
   Gold am I, and for me, ever men curse and pray,
     Selling their souls and each other, by night and day.A sordid colour, and yet, I make some things fair,
     Dying sunsets, fields of corn, and a maiden's hair.Thus they discoursed in the daytime,--Violet, Yellow, and Blue,
     Emerald, Scarlet, and Rose-colour, the pink and perfect hue.Thus they spoke in the sunshine, when their beauty was manifest,
     Till the Night came, and the Silence, and gave them an equal rest.Lalila, to the Ferengi Lover

   Why above others was I so blessed
      And honoured?to be chosen one
   To hold you, sleeping, against my breast,
      As now I may hold your only son.You gave your life to me in a kiss;
   Have I done well, for that past delight,
      In return, to have given you this?Look down at his face, your face, beloved,
      His eyes are azure as yours are blue.In every line of his form is proved
      How well I loved you, and only you.I felt the secret hope at my heart
      Turned suddenly to the living joy,
   And knew that your life and mine had part
      As golden grains in a brass alloy.And learning thus, that your child was mine,
      Thrilled by the sense of its stirring life,
   I held myself as a sacred shrine
      Afar from pleasure, and pain, and strife,

   That all unworthy I might not be
      Of that you had deigned to cause to dwell
   Hidden away in the heart of me,
      As white pearls hide in a dusky shell.Do you remember, when first you laid
      Your lips on mine, that enchanted night?My eyes were timid, my lips afraid,
      You seemed so slender and strangely white.I always tremble; the moments flew
      Swiftly to dawn that took you away,
   But this is a small and lovely you
      Content to rest in my arms all day.Oh, since you have sought me, Lord, for this,
      And given your only child to me,
   My life devoted to yours and his,
      Whilst I am living, will always be.And after death, through the long To Be,
      (Which, I think, must surely keep love's laws,)
   I, should you chance to have need of me,
      Am ever and always, only yours.On the City Wall

   Upon the City Ramparts, lit up by sunset gleam,
   The Blue eyes that conquer, meet the Darker eyes that dream.The Dark eyes, so Eastern, and the Blue eyes from the West,
   The last alight with action, the first so full of rest.Brown, that seem to hold the Past; its magic mystery,
   Blue, that catch the early light, of ages yet to be.Meet and fall and meet again, then linger, look, and smile,
   Time and distance all forgotten, for a little while.Happy on the city wall, in the warm spring weather,
   All the force of Nature's laws, drawing them together.East and West so gaily blending, for a little space,
   All the sunshine seems to centre, round th' Enchanted place!One rides down the dusty road, one watches from the wall,
   Azure eyes would fain return, and Amber eyes recall;

   Would fain be on the ramparts, and resting heart to heart,
   But time o' love is overpast, East and West must part.Those are dim, and ride away, these cry themselves to sleep._"Oh, since Love is all so short, the sob so near the smile,_
   _Blue eyes that always conquer us, is it worth your while?"_





"Love Lightly"

   There were Roses in the hedges, and Sunshine in the sky,
   Red Lilies in the sedges, where the water rippled by,
   A thousand Bulbuls singing, oh, how jubilant they were,
   And a thousand flowers flinging their sweetness on the air.But you, who sat beside me, had a shadow in your eyes,
   Their sadness seemed to chide me, when I gave you scant replies;
   You asked "Did I remember?"In vain you fanned the ember, for the love flame was not there."And so, since you are tired of me, you ask me to forget,
     What is the use of caring, now that you no longer care?When Love is dead his Memory can only bring regret,
     But how can I forget you with the flowers in your hair?"What use the scented Roses, or the azure of the sky?They are sweet when Love reposes, but then he had to die.What could I do in leaving you, but ask you to forget,--
   I suffered, too, in grieving you; I all but loved you yet.But half love is a treason, that no lover can forgive,
   I had loved you for a season, I had no more to give.You saw my passion faltered, for I could but let you see,
   And it was not I that altered, but Fate that altered me.And so, since I am tired of love, I ask you to forget,
     What is the use you caring, now that I no longer care?When Love is dead, his Memory can only bring regret;
     Forget me, oh, forget me, and my flower-scented hair!No Rival Like the Past

   As those who eat a Luscious Fruit, sunbaked,
     Full of sweet juice, with zest, until they find
   It finished, and their appetite unslaked,
     And so return and eat the pared-off rind;--

   We, who in Youth, set white and careless teeth
     In the Ripe Fruits of Pleasure while they last,
   Later, creep back to gnaw the cast-off sheath,
     And find there is no Rival like the Past.Verse by Taj Mahomed

   When first I loved, I gave my very soul
   Utterly unreserved to Love's control,
   But Love deceived me, wrenched my youth away
   And made the gold of life for ever grey.Long I lived lonely, yet I tried in vain
   With any other Joy to stifle pain;
   There _is_ no other joy, I learned to know,
   And so returned to Love, as long ago.Yet I, this little while ere I go hence,
   Love very lightly now, in self-defence.Lines by Taj Mahomed

   This passion is but an ember
     Of a Sun, of a Fire, long set;
   I could not live and remember,
     And so I love and forget.You say, and the tone is fretful,
     That my mourning days were few,
   You call me over forgetful--
     My God, if you only knew!There is no Breeze to Cool the Heat of Love

   The listless Palm-trees catch the breeze above
     The pile-built huts that edge the salt Lagoon,
   There is no Breeze to cool the heat of love,
     No wind from land or sea, at night or noon.Perfumed and robed I wait, my Lord, for you,
     And my heart waits alert, with strained delight,
   My flowers are loath to close, as though they knew
     That you will come to me before the night.In the Verandah all the lights are lit,
     And softly veiled in rose to please your eyes,
   Between the pillars flying foxes flit,
     Their wings transparent on the lilac skies.Come soon, my Lord, come soon, I almost fear
     My heart may fail me in this keen suspense,
   Break with delight, at last, to know you near.Pleasure is one with Pain, if too intense.I envy these: the steps that you will tread,
     The jasmin that will touch you by its leaves,
   When, in your slender height, you stoop your head
     At the low door beneath the palm-thatched eaves.For though you utterly belong to me,
     And love has done his utmost 'twixt us twain,
   Your slightest, careless touch yet seems to be
     That keen delight so much akin to pain.The night breeze blows across the still Lagoon,
     And stirs the Palm-trees till they wave above
   Our pile-built huts; Oh, come, my Lord, come soon,
     There is no Breeze to cool the heat of love.Every time you give yourself to me,
     The gift seems greater, and yourself more fair,
   This slight-built, palm-thatched hut has come to be
     A temple, since, my Lord, you visit there.And as the water, gurgling softly, goes
     Among the piles beneath the slender floor;
   I hear it murmur, as it seaward flows,
     Of the great Wonder seen upon the shore.The Miracle, that you should come to me,
     Whom the whole world, seeing, can but desire,
   It is as though some White Star stooped to be
     The messmate of our little cooking fire.Leaving the Glory of his Purple Skies,
     And the White Friendship of the Crescent Moon,
   And yet;--I look into your brilliant eyes,
     And find content; Oh, come, my Lord, come soon.Perfumed and robed I wait for you, I wait,
     The flowers that please you wreathed about my hair,
   And this poor face set forth in jewelled state,
     So more than proud since you have found it fair.My lute is ready, and the fragrant drink
     Your lips may honour, how it will rejoice
   Losing its life in yours!the lute I think
     But wastes the time when I might hear your voice.Your slightest, as your utmost, wish or will,
   Whether it please you to caress or slay,
     It would please me to give obedience still.I would delight to die beneath your kiss;
     I envy that young maiden who was slain,
   So her warm blood, flowing beneath the kiss,
     Might ease the wounded Sultan of his pain--

   If she loved him as I love you, my Lord.There is no pleasure on the earth so sweet
   As is the pain endured for one adored;
     If I lay crushed beneath your slender feet

   I should be happy!Ah, come soon, come soon,
     See how the stars grow large and white above,
   The land breeze blows across the salt Lagoon,
     There is no Breeze to cool the heat of love.Malay Song

   The Stars await, serene and white,
     The unarisen moon;
   Oh, come and stay with me to-night,
     Beside the salt Lagoon!My hut is small, but as you lie,
     You see the lighted shore,
   And hear the rippling water sigh
     Beneath the pile-raised floor.No gift have I of jewels or flowers,
     My room is poor and bare:
   But all the silver sea is ours,
     And all the scented air

   Blown from the mainland, where there grows
     Th' "Intriguer of the Night,"
   The flower that you have named Tube rose,
     Sweet scented, slim, and white.The flower that, when the air is still
     And no land breezes blow,
   From its pale petals can distil
     A phosphorescent glow.I see your ship at anchor ride;
     Her "captive lightning" shine.Before she takes to-morrow's tide,
     Let this one night be mine!Though in the language of your land
     My words are poor and few,
   Oh, read my eyes, and understand,
     I give my youth to you!The Temple Dancing Girl

   You will be mine; those lightly dancing feet,
     Falling as softly on the careless street
   As the wind-loosened petals of a flower,
     Will bring you here, at the Appointed Hour.And all the Temple's little links and laws
     Will not for long protect your loveliness.I have a stronger force to aid my cause,
     Nature's great Law, to love and to possess!Throughout those sleepless watches, when I lay
     Wakeful, desiring what I might not see,
   I knew (it helped those hours, from dusk to day),
     In this one thing, Fate would be kind to me.You will consent, through all my veins like wine
     This prescience flows; your lips meet mine above,
   Your clear soft eyes look upward into mine
     Dim in a silent ecstasy of love.The clustered softness of your waving hair,
     That curious paleness which enchants me so,
   And all your delicate strength and youthful air,
     Destiny will compel you to bestow!Refuse, withdraw, and hesitate awhile,
     Your young reluctance does but fan the flame;
   My partner, Love, waits, with a tender smile,
     Who play against him play a losing game.I, strong in nothing else, have strength in this,
     The subtlest, most resistless, force we know
   Is aiding me; and you must stoop and kiss:
     The genius of the race will have it so!Yet, make it not too long, nor too intense
     My thirst; lest I should break beneath the strain,
   And the worn nerves, and over-wearied sense,
     Enjoy not what they spent themselves to gain.Lest, in the hour when you consent to share
     That human passion Beauty makes divine,
   I, over worn, should find you over fair,
     Lest I should die before I make you mine.You will consent, those slim, reluctant feet,
     Falling as lightly on the careless street
   As the white petals of a wind-worn flower,
     Will bring you here, at the Appointed Hour.Hira-Singh's Farewell to Burmah

   On the wooden deck of the wooden Junk, silent, alone, we lie,
   With silver foam about the bow, and a silver moon in the sky:
   A glimmer of dimmer silver here, from the anklets round your feet,
   Our lips may close on each other's lips, but never our souls may meet.For though in my arms you lie at rest, your name I have never heard,
   To carry a thought between us two, we have not a single word.And yet what matter we do not speak, when the ardent eyes have spoken,
   The way of love is a sweeter way, when the silence is unbroken.As a wayward Fancy, tired at times, of the cultured Damask Rose,
   Drifts away to the tangled copse, where the wild Anemone grows;
   So the ordered and licit love ashore, is hardly fresh and free
   As this light love in the open wind and salt of the outer sea.So sweet you are, with your tinted cheeks and your small caressive hands,
   What if I carried you home with me, where our Golden Temple stands?Yet, this were folly indeed; to bind, in fetters of permanence,
   A passing dream whose enchantment charms because of its trancience.Life is ever a slave to Time; we have but an hour to rest,
   Her steam is up and her lighters leave, the vessel that takes me west;
   And never again we two shall meet, as we chance to meet to-night,
   On the Junk, whose painted eyes gaze forth, in desolate want of sight.And what is love at its best, but this?Conceived by a passing glance,
   Nursed and reared in a transient mood, on a drifting Sea of Chance.For rudderless craft are all our loves, among the rocks and the shoals,
   Well we may know one another's speech, but never each other's souls.Give here your lips and kiss me again, we have but a moment more,
   Before we set the sail to the mast, before we loosen the oar.Good-bye to you, and my thanks to you, for the rest you let me share,
   While this night drifted away to the Past, to join the Nights that Were.Starlight

   O beautiful Stars, when you see me go
     Hither and thither, in search of love,
   Do you think me faithless, who gleam and glow
     Serene and fixed in the blue above?O Stars, so golden, it is not so.But there is a garden I dare not see,
     There is a place where I fear to go,
   Since the charm and glory of life to me
     The brown earth covered there, long ago.O Stars, you saw it, you know, you know.Hither and thither I wandering go,
     With aimless haste and wearying fret;
   In a search for pleasure and love?Not so,
     Seeking desperately to forget.You see so many, O Stars, you know.Sampan Song

   A little breeze blew over the sea,
       And it came from far away,
   Across the fields of millet and rice,
   All warm with sunshine and sweet with spice,
   It lifted his curls and kissed him thrice,
       As upon the deck he lay.It said, "Oh, idle upon the sea,
       Awake and with sleep have done,
   Haul up the widest sail of the prow,
   And come with me to the rice fields now,
   She longs, oh, how can I tell you how,
       To show you your first-born son!"Song of the Devoted Slave

   There is one God: Mahomed his Prophet.Had I his power
   I would take the topmost peaks of the snow-clad Himalayas,
   And would range them around your dwelling, during the heats of summer,
   To cool the airs that fan your serene and delicate presence,
                   Had I the power.Your courtyard should ever be filled with the fleetest of camels
   Laden with inlaid armour, jewels and trappings for horses,
   Ripe dates from Egypt, and spices and musk from Arabia.And the sacred waters of Zem-Zem well, transported thither,
   Should bubble and flow in your chamber, to bathe the delicate
   Slender and wayworn feet of my Lord, returning from travel,
                   Had I the power.Fine woven silk, from the further East, should conceal your beauty,
   Clinging around you in amorous folds; caressive, silken,
   Beautiful long-lashed, sweet-voiced Persian boys should, kneeling, serve you,
   And the floor beneath your sandalled feet should be smooth and golden,
                   Had I the power.And if ever your clear and stately thoughts should turn to women,
   Kings' daughters, maidens, should be appointed to your caresses,
   That the youth and the strength of my Lord might never be wasted
   In light or sterile love; but enrich the world with his children.Whilst I should sit in the outer court of the Water Palace
   To await the time when you went forth, for Pleasure or Warfare,
   Descending the stairs rose crowned, or armed and arrayed in purple,--
   To mark the place where your steps have fallen, and kiss the footprints,
                   Had I the power.The Singer

   The singer only sang the Joy of Life,
     For all too well, alas!the singer knew
   How hard the daily toil, how keen the strife,
     How salt the falling tear; the joys how few.He who thinks hard soon finds it hard to live,
     Learning the Secret Bitterness of Things:
   So, leaving thought, the singer strove to give
     A level lightness to his lyric strings.He only sang of Love; its joy and pain,
     But each man in his early season loves;
   Each finds the old, lost Paradise again,
     Unfolding leaves, and roses, nesting doves.And though that sunlit time flies all too fleetly,
     Delightful Days that dance away too soon!Its early morning freshness lingers sweetly
     Throughout life's grey and tedious afternoon.And he, whose dreams enshrine her tender eyes,
     And she, whose senses wait his waking hand,
   Impatient youth, that tired but sleepless lies,
     Will read perhaps, and reading, understand.Oh, roseate lips he would have loved to kiss,
     Oh, eager lovers that he never knew!What should you know of him, or words of his?--
     But all the songs he sang were sung for you!Malaria

   He lurks among the reeds, beside the marsh,
     Red oleanders twisted in His hair,
   His eyes are haggard and His lips are harsh,
     Upon His breast the bones show gaunt and bare.The green and stagnant waters lick His feet,
     And from their filmy, iridescent scum
   Clouds of mosquitoes, gauzy in the heat,
     Rise with His gifts: Death and Delirium.His messengers: They bear the deadly taint
     On spangled wings aloft and far away,
   Making thin music, strident and yet faint,
     From golden eve to silver break of day.The baffled sleeper hears th' incessant whine
     Through his tormented dreams, and finds no rest
   The thirsty insects use his blood for wine,
     Probe his blue veins and pasture on his breast.While far away He in the marshes lies,
     Staining the stagnant water with His breath,
   An endless hunger burning in His eyes,
     A famine unassuaged, whose food is Death.He hides among the ghostly mists that float
     Over the water, weird and white and chill,
   And peasants, passing in their laden boat,
     Shiver and feel a sense of coming ill.A thousand burn and die; He takes no heed,
     Their bones, unburied, strewn upon the plain,
   Only increase the frenzy of His greed
     To add more victims to th' already slain.He loves the haggard frame, the shattered mind,
     Gloats with delight upon the glazing eye,
   Yet, in one thing, His cruelty is kind,
     He sends them lovely dreams before they die;

   Dreams that bestow on them their heart's desire,
     Visions that find them mad, and leave them blest,
   To sink, forgetful of the fever's fire,
     Softly, as in a lover's arms, to rest.Fancy

   Far in the Further East the skilful craftsman
       Fashioned this fancy for the West's delight.This rose and azure Dragon, crouching softly
       Upon the satin skin, close-grained and white.And you lay silent, while his slender needles
       Pricked the intricate pattern on your arm,
   Combining deftly Cruelty and Beauty,
       That subtle union, whose child is charm.Charm irresistible: the lovely something
       We follow in our dreams, but may not reach.The unattainable Divine Enchantment,
       Hinted in music, never heard in speech.This from the blue design exhales towards me,
       As incense rises from the Homes of Prayer,
   While the unfettered eyes, allured and rested,
       Urge the forbidden lips to stoop and share;

   Share in the sweetness of the rose and azure
       Traced in the Dragon's form upon the white
   Curve of the arm.Ah, curb thyself, my fancy,
       Where would'st thou drift in this enchanted flight?Feroza

   The evening sky was as green as Jade,
      As Emerald turf by Lotus lake,
   Behind the Kafila far she strayed,
      (The Pearls are lost if the Necklace break!)A lingering freshness touched the air
      From palm-trees, clustered around a Spring,
   The great, grim Desert lay vast and bare,
      But Youth is ever a careless thing.The Raiders threw her upon the sand,
      Men of the Wilderness know no laws,
   They tore the Amethysts off her hand,
      And rent the folds of her veiling gauze.They struck the lips that they might have kissed,
      Pitiless they to her pain and fear,
   And wrenched the gold from her broken wrist,
      No use to cry; there were none to hear.Her scarlet mouth and her onyx eyes,
      Her braided hair in its silken sheen,
   Were surely meet for a Lover's prize,
      But Fate dissented, and stepped between.Across the Zenith the vultures fly,
      Cruel of beak and heavy of wing.This Month the Almonds Bloom at Kandahar

   I hate this City, seated on the Plain,
     The clang and clamour of the hot Bazar,
   Knowing, amid the pauses of my pain,
     This month the Almonds bloom in Kandahar.The Almond-trees, that sheltered my Delight,
     Screening my happiness as evening fell.It was well worth--that most Enchanted Night--
     This life in torment, and the next in Hell!People are kind to me; one More than Kind,
     Her lashes lie like fans upon her cheek,
   But kindness is a burden on my mind,
     And it is weariness to hear her speak.For though that Kaffir's bullet holds me here,
     My thoughts are ever free, and wander far,
   To where the Lilac Hills rise, soft and clear,
     Beyond the Almond Groves of Kandahar.He followed me to Sibi, to the Fair,
     The Horse-fair, where he shot me weeks ago,
   But since they fettered him I have no care
     That my returning steps to health are slow.They will not loose him till they know my fate,
     And I rest here till I am strong to slay,
   Meantime, my Heart's Delight may safely wait
     Among the Almond blossoms, sweet as they.Well, he won by day,
     But I won, what I so desired, by night,
   _My_ arms held what his lack till Judgment Day!Also, the game is not yet over--quite!Wait, Amir Ali, wait till I come forth
     To kill, before the Almond-trees are green,
   To raze thy very Memory from the North,
     _So that thou art not, and thou hast not been!_

   Aha!it is Duty
     To rid the World from Shiah dogs like thee,
   They are but ill-placed moles on Islam's beauty,
     Such as the Faithful cannot calmly see!Also thy bullet hurts me not a little,
     Thy Shiah blood might serve to salve the ill.Maybe some Afghan Promises are brittle;
     Never a Promise to oneself, to kill!Now I grow stronger, I have days of leisure
     To shape my coming Vengeance as I lie,
   And, undisturbed by call of War or Pleasure,
     Can dream of many ways a man may die.I shall not torture thee, thy friends might rally,
     Some Fate assist thee and prove false to me;
   Oh!shouldst thou now escape me, Amir Ali,
     This would torment me through Eternity!Aye, Shuffa-Jan, I will be quiet indeed,
     Give here the Hakim's powder if thou wilt,
   And thou mayst sit, for I perceive thy need,
     And rest thy soft-haired head upon my quilt.Thy gentle love will not disturb a mind
     That loves and hates beneath a fiercer Star.Also, thou know'st, my Heart is left behind,
     Among the Almond-trees of Kandahar!End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of India's Love Lyrics, by 
Adela Florence Cory Nicolson (AKA Laurence Hope), et al.Griffith, Richard, 74-75.Grotthus, Sara v., 40-41.Hamann, 28, 29, 59, 69, 71, 97, 153.Hartknoch, 28, 32, 97.Herder, 5, 7, 8, 28, 29, 32, 59, 97, 99, 156.Herder, Caroline Flachsland, 89, 99, 152.Hermes, 2, 8, 109.Hippel, 6, 59, 101, 155.Hofmann, J. C., 88.Jacobi, 59, 85-90, 112-114, 131, 136, 139, 142, 143.Klausing, A. E., 72.Klopstock, 37, 51, 59.Knigge, 91, 93, 110, 154, 166.Koran, 74-76, 92, 95, 103-108, 153.Lessing, 24-28, 40-46, 59, 62, 77, 97, 109, 156.Lichtenberg, 4, 78, 84, 158-60.Matthison, 60, 89, 152.
  de Medalle, Lydia Sterne, 64, 68, 69.Mendelssohn, 24, 43, 109, 110.Miller, J. M., 168, 170, 173, 180.Mittelstedt, 46-47, 55-57, 115.Müchler, K. F., 79.Musäus, 10, 91, 138, 152, 153, 158.Nicolai, 27, 40, 43, 77, 78, 110;
  Sebaldus Nothanker, 6, 88, 110, 150.Nicolay, Ludwig Heinrich v., 158.Paterson, Sam’l, 79.Percy, Bishop, 2, 10.Rabenau, A. G. F., 138.Rahmel, A. W. L., 166.Richardson, 4, 10, 31, 43, 96, 179.Richter, Jean Paul, 75, 91, 155.Riedel, 29-30, 32, 54, 109, 125.
  la Roche, Sophie, 139.Sattler, J. P., 8.Schink, J. F., 80-82.Schummel, 59, 93, 114-129, 136, 140.Stephanie, d. j., 153.Stevenson, J. H., 44-53, 57, 64, 81, 105.Swift, 69, 146, 157, 160.

  v. Thümmel, 93, 135, 155.Wagner, H. L., 41, 157.Wezel, 110, 138, 144-150, 179-181.Wieland, 10, 14, 31, 32, 42, 59, 61, 73, 90, 93-99, 103, 146,
      156, 181.Wittenberg, 53, 87.
  v. Wolzogen, 153.Young, 7, 10, 149-150.Zückert, 12-18, 22, 31, 32, 37, 58-60, 99.*       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

Errors and Inconsistencies

German text is unchanged unless there was an unambiguous error, or the
text could be checked against other sources.Most quoted material is
contemporary with Sterne; spellings such as “bey” and “Theil” are
standard.Missing letters or punctuation marks are genuinely absent, not merely
invisible.is shown as printed, as is any adjoining
punctuation.The variation between “title page” and “title-page” is unchanged.Punctuation of “ff” is unchanged; at mid-sentence there is usually no
following period.Hyphenization of phrases such as “a twelve-year old”
is consistent.Chapter I

  the unstored mind  [_unchanged_]

Chapter II

  des vaterländischen Geschmack entwickeln
    [_unchanged: error for “den”?_]
  Vol.245-251, 1772  [245-251.]Bode, the successful and honored translator  [sucessful]
  sends it as such to “my uncle, Tobias Shandy.”
    [_open quote missing_]
  Ich bin an seine Sentiments zum Theil schon so gewöhnt  [go]
  Footnote 48:.in Auszug aus den Werken  [Auzug]
  Julie von Bondeli[52]  [Von]
  frequent references to other English celebrities  [refrences]
  “How many have understood it?”  [understod]

Chapter III

  He says of the first parts of the Sentimental Journey,  [Journay]
  the _Hamburgische Adress-Comptoir-Nachrichten_;[19]
    [Nachrichten_;” with superfluous close quote]
  Footnote 19:... prominent Hamburg periodical.][perodical]
  eine Reise heissen, bey der  [be]
  It may well be that, as Böttiger hints,[24]  [Bottiger]
  Footnote 24: See foot note to page lxiii.][_two words_]
  Bode’s translation in the Allgemeine  [Allegemeine]
  has been generally accepted  [generaly]

Chapter IV

  manages to turn it at once with the greatest delicacy  [delicay]
  the Journey which is here mentioned.”[31]  [mentionad]
  Footnote 34:... (LII, pp.370-371)  [_missing )_]
  he is probably building on the incorrect statement  [incorect]
  Footnote 87:... Berlin, 1810  [810].“Die Schöne Obstverkäuferin”  [“Die “Schöne]

Chapter V

  Footnote 3... Anmerk.24  [Anmerk,]
  Animae quales non candidiores terra tulit.”  [_missing close quote_]
  “like Grenough’s tooth-tincture  [_missing open quote_]
  founding an order of “Empfindsamkeit.”  [_missing close quote_]
  Footnote 24... “Der Teufel auf Reisen,”  [Riesen]
  Footnote 27... _Allg.deutsche Bibl._  [Allg deutsche]
  Sein Seelchen auf den Himmel  [gen Himmel]
  In an article in the _Horen_ (1795, V. Stück,)  [V Stück]
  Footnote 84... G. B. Mendelssohn  [G. B Mendelssohn]

Chapter VI

  re-introducing a sentimental relationship.[relationiship]
  nach Erfindung der Buchdrukerkunst  [_unchanged_]
  “Ueber die roten und schwarzen Röcke,”  [_“Röke” without close quote]
  the twelve irregularly printed lines  [twleve]
  conventional thread of introduction  [inroduction]
  an appropriate proof of incapacity  [incaapcity]
  [Footnote 23... Litteratur-geschichte  [_hyphen in original_]
  Footnote 35... p. 28.missing_]
  [Footnote 38... a rather full analysis  [nalysis]
  multifarious and irrelevant topics  [mutifarious]
  Goethe replies (December 30), in approval, and exclaims  [exlaims]
  laughed heartily at some of the whims.”[49]  [_missing close quote_]
  [Footnote 52... Hademann as author  [auther]
  für diesen schreibe ich dieses Kapitel nicht  [fur]
  [Footnote 69... _July_ 1, 1774  [_italics in original_]
  Darauf denke ich, soll jedermanniglich vom 22.Absatze fahren
    [_“vom.Absatze” with extra space after “22.” as if for
    a new sentence_]
  accompanied by typographical eccentricities  [typograhical]
  the relationships of trivial things  [relationiships]
  Herr v.***  [_asterisks unchanged_]

Chapter VII

  expressed themselves quite unequivocally  [themsleves]
  the pleasure of latest posterity.”  [_final.missing_]
  “regarded his taste as insulted because I sent him “Yorick’s
    Empfindsame Reise.”[3]
    [_mismatched quotation marks unchanged_]
  Georg Christopher Lichtenberg.[7]
    [Lichtenberg.” with superfluous close quote]
  Aus Lichtenbergs Nachlass: Aufsätze, Gedichte, Tagebuchblätter
   [_“Gedichte Tagebuchblätter” without comma_]
  Doch lass’ ich, wenn mir’s Kurzweil schafft  [schaft]
  a poem named “Empfindsamkeiten  [Enpfindsamkeiten]
  A poet cries  [croes]
  “Faramond’s Familiengeschichte,”[46]
    [_inconsistent apostrophe unchanged: compare footnote_]
  sondern mich zu bedauern!’  [_inner close quote conjectural_]
  Ruhe deinem Staube  [dienem]
  the neighboring village is in flames  [nieghboring]
  Footnote 67... [_all German spelling in this footnote unchanged_]
  “Die Tausend und eine Masche, oder Yoricks wahres Shicksall,
    ein blaues Mährchen von Herrn Stanhope” [_all spelling unchanged]


[The Bibliography is shown in the Table of Contents as “Chapter VIII”,
but was printed without a chapter header.]Bibliography (England)

  Life of Laurence Sterne, by Percy Fitzgerald  [Lift]
  b. The Sentimental Journey  [Jonrney]

Bibliography (Germany)

  The Koran, etc.Tristram Schandi’s Leben und Meynungen... III, pp.210]
  durch Frankreich und Italien, übersetzt von A. Lewald.But this blow was never meant for
the poor man on whom it has unhappily fallen.Every one knew what Oliver
Proudfute was, how wide he would speak, and how little he would do.He
has Henry Smith's buff coat, target, and head piece.All the town know
them as well as I do: there is no doubt on't.He had the trick, as you
know, of trying to imitate the smith in most things.Some one, blind
with rage, or perhaps through liquor, has stricken the innocent bonnet
maker, whom no man either hated or feared, or indeed cared either much
or little about, instead of the stout smith, who has twenty feuds upon
his hands.""What then, is to be done, bailie?""That, my friends, your magistrates will determine for you, as we shall
instantly meet together when Sir Patrick Charteris cometh here, which
must be anon.Meanwhile, let the chirurgeon Dwining examine that poor
piece of clay, that he may tell us how he came by his fatal death; and
then let the corpse be decently swathed in a clean shroud, as becomes
an honest citizen, and placed before the high altar in the church of
St.Cease all clamour and noise, and
every defensible man of you, as you would wish well to the Fair Town,
keep his weapons in readiness, and be prepared to assemble on the High
Street at the tolling of the common bell from the townhouse, and we will
either revenge the death of our fellow citizen, or else we shall take
such fortune as Heaven will send us.Meanwhile avoid all quarrelling
With the knights and their followers till we know the innocent from the
guilty.But wherefore tarries this knave Smith?He is ready enough
in tumults when his presence is not wanted, and lags he now when his
presence may serve the Fair City?What ails him, doth any one know?Hath
he been upon the frolic last Fastern's Even?""Rather he is sick or sullen, Master Bailie," said one of the city's
mairs, or sergeants; "for though he is within door, as his knaves
report, yet he will neither answer to us nor admit us.""So please your worship, Master Bailie," said Simon Glover, "I will go
myself to fetch Henry Smith.I have some little difference to make up
with him.And blessed be Our Lady, who hath so ordered it that I find
him alive, as a quarter of an hour since I could never have expected!""Bring the stout smith to the council house," said the bailie, as a
mounted yeoman pressed through the crowd and whispered in his ear, "Here
is a good fellow who says the Knight of Kinfauns is entering the port."Such was the occasion of Simon Glover presenting himself at the house of
Henry Gow at the period already noticed.Unrestrained by the considerations of doubt and hesitation which
influenced others, he repaired to the parlour; and having overheard the
bustling of Dame Shoolbred, he took the privilege of intimacy to ascend
to the bedroom, and, with the slight apology of "I crave your pardon,
good neighbour," he opened the door and entered the apartment, where a
singular and unexpected sight awaited him.At the sound of his voice,
May Catharine experienced a revival much speedier than Dame Shoolbred's
restoratives had been able to produce, and the paleness of her
complexion changed into a deep glow of the most lovely red.She pushed
her lover from her with both her hands, which, until this minute, her
want of consciousness, or her affection, awakened by the events of the
morning, had well nigh abandoned to his caresses.Henry Smith, bashful
as we know him, stumbled as he rose up; and none of the party were
without a share of confusion, excepting Dame Shoolbred, who was glad
to make some pretext to turn her back to the others, in order that she
might enjoy a laugh at their expense, which she felt herself utterly
unable to restrain, and in which the glover, whose surprise, though
great, was of short duration, and of a joyful character, sincerely
joined.John," he said, "I thought I had seen a sight this
morning that would cure me of laughter, at least till Lent was over;
but this would make me curl my cheek if I were dying.Why, here stands
honest Henry Smith, who was lamented as dead, and toll'd out for from
every steeple in town, alive, merry, and, as it seems from his ruddy
complexion, as like to live as any man in Perth.And here is my precious
daughter, that yesterday would speak of nothing but the wickedness of
the wights that haunt profane sports and protect glee maidens.Cupid both at defiance--here she is,
turned a glee maiden herself, for what I can see!Truly, I am glad to
see that you, my good Dame Shoolbred, who give way to no disorder, have
been of this loving party.""You do me wrong, my dearest father," said Catharine, as if about to
weep."I came here with far different expectations than you suppose.I
only came because--because--"

"Because you expected to find a dead lover," said her father, "and you
have found a living one, who can receive the tokens of your regard, and
return them.Now, were it not a sin, I could find in my heart to thank
Heaven that thou hast been surprised at last into owning thyself a
woman.Simon Glover is not worthy to have an absolute saint for his
daughter.Nay, look not so piteously, nor expect condolence from me!Only I will try not to look merry, if you will be pleased to stop your
tears, or confess them to be tears of joy.""If I were to die for such a confession," said poor Catharine, "I could
not tell what to call them.Only believe, dear father, and let Henry
believe, that I would never have come hither; unless--unless--"

"Unless you had thought that Henry could not come to you," said her
father."And now, shake hands in peace and concord, and agree as
Valentines should.Yesterday was Shrovetide, Henry; We will hold that
thou hast confessed thy follies, hast obtained absolution, and art
relieved of all the guilt thou stoodest charged with.""Nay touching that, father Simon," said the smith, "now that you are
cool enough to hear me, I can swear on the Gospels, and I can call my
nurse, Dame Shoolbred, to witness--"

"Nay--nay," said the glover, "but wherefore rake up differences which
should all be forgotten?""Hark ye, Simon!--Simon Glover!""True, son Smith," said the glover, seriously, "we have other work in
hand.Catharine shall remain
here with Dame Shoolbred, who will take charge of her till we return;
and then, as the town is in misrule, we two, Harry, will carry her home,
and they will be bold men that cross us.""Nay, my dear father," said Catharine, with a smile, "now you are taking
Oliver Proudfute's office.That doughty burgher is Henry's brother at
arms.""You have spoke a stinging word, daughter; but you know not what has
happened.Kiss him, Catharine, in token of forgiveness.""Not so," said Catharine; "I have done him too much grace already.When
he has seen the errant damsel safe home, it will be time enough to claim
his reward.""Meantime," said Henry, "I will claim, as your host, what you will not
allow me on other terms."He folded the fair maiden in his arms, and was permitted to take the
salute which she had refused to bestow.As they descended the stair together, the old man laid his hand on the
smith's shoulder, and said: "Henry, my dearest wishes are fulfilled;
but it is the pleasure of the saints that it should be in an hour of
difficulty and terror.""True," said the smith; "but thou knowest, father, if our riots be
frequent at Perth, at least they seldom last long."Then, opening a door which led from the house into the smithy, "here,
comrades," he cried, "Anton, Cuthbert, Dingwell, and Ringen!Let none of
you stir from the place till I return.Be as true as the weapons I have
taught you to forge: a French crown and a Scotch merrymaking for you, if
you obey my command.Watch
the doors well, let little Jannekin scout up and down the wynd, and have
your arms ready if any one approaches the house.Open the doors to no
man till father Glover or I return: it concerns my life and happiness."The strong, swarthy giants to whom he spoke answered: "Death to him who
attempts it!""My Catharine is now as safe," said he to her father, "as if twenty men
garrisoned a royal castle in her cause.We shall pass most quietly to
the council house by walking through the garden."He led the way through a little orchard accordingly, where the birds,
which had been sheltered and fed during the winter by the good natured
artisan, early in the season as it was, were saluting the precarious
smiles of a February sun with a few faint and interrupted attempts at
melody."Hear these minstrels, father," said the smith; "I laughed at them this
morning in the bitterness of my heart, because the little wretches sung,
with so much of winter before them.But now, methinks, I could bear a
blythe chorus, for I have my Valentine as they have theirs; and whatever
ill may lie before me for tomorrow, I am today the happiest man in
Perth, city or county, burgh or landward.""Yet I must allay your joy," said the old glover, "though, Heaven knows,
I share it.Poor Oliver Proudfute, the inoffensive fool that you and I
knew so well, has been found this morning dead in the streets."said the smith; "nay, a candle and a dose of
matrimonial advice will bring him to life again."He is slain--slain with a battle axe or some such
weapon."replied the smith; "he was light footed enough, and would
not for all Perth have trusted to his hands, when he could extricate
himself by his heels."The blow was dealt in the very back of his
head; he who struck must have been a shorter man than himself, and used
a horseman's battle axe, or some such weapon, for a Lochaber axe must
have struck the upper part of his head.But there he lies dead, brained,
I may say, by a most frightful wound.""This is inconceivable," said Henry Wynd."He was in my house at
midnight, in a morricer's habit; seemed to have been drinking, though
not to excess.He told me a tale of having been beset by revellers,
and being in danger; but, alas!you know the man--I deemed it was a
swaggering fit, as he sometimes took when he was in liquor; and, may the
Merciful Virgin forgive me!I let him go without company, in which I did
him inhuman wrong.I would have gone with
any helpless creature; and far more with him, with whom I have so often
sat at the same board and drunken of the same cup.Who, of the race
of man, could have thought of harming a creature so simple and so
unoffending, excepting by his idle vaunts?""Henry, he wore thy head piece, thy buff coat; thy target."Why, he demanded the use of them for the night, and I was ill at ease,
and well pleased to be rid of his company, having kept no holiday, and
being determined to keep none, in respect of our misunderstanding.""It is the opinion of Bailie Craigdallie and all our sagest counsellors
that the blow was intended for yourself, and that it becomes you to
prosecute the due vengeance of our fellow citizen, who received the
death which was meant for you."They had now left the garden, and
were walking in a lonely lane, by which they meant to approach the
council house of the burgh without being exposed to observation or idle
inquiry."You are silent, my son, yet we two have much to speak of," said Simon
Glover."Bethink thee that this widowed woman, Maudlin, if she should
see cause to bring a charge against any one for the wrong done to her
and her orphan children, must support it by a champion, according to
law and custom; for, be the murderer who he may, we know enough of these
followers of the nobles to be assured that the party suspected will
appeal to the combat, in derision, perhaps, of we whom they will call
the cowardly burghers.While we are men with blood in our veins, this
must not be, Henry Wynd.""I see where you would draw me, father," answered Henry, dejectedly,
"and St.John knows I have heard a summons to battle as willingly as war
horse ever heard the trumpet.But bethink you, father, how I have lost
Catharine's favour repeatedly, and have been driven well nigh to despair
of ever regaining it, for being, if I may say so, even too ready a man
of my hands.And here are all our quarrels made up, and the hopes that
seemed this morning removed beyond earthly prospect have become
nearer and brighter than ever; and must I with the dear one's kiss of
forgiveness on my lips, engage in a new scene of violence, which you are
well aware will give her the deepest offence?""It is hard for me to advise you, Henry," said Simon; "but this I must
ask you: Have you, or have you not, reason to think that this poor
unfortunate Oliver has been mistaken for you?""I fear it too much," said Henry."He was thought something like me, and
the poor fool had studied to ape my gestures and manner of walking,
nay the very airs which I have the trick of whistling, that he might
increase a resemblance which has cost him dear.I have ill willers
enough, both in burgh and landward, to owe me a shrewd turn; and he, I
think, could have none such.""Well, Henry, I cannot say but my daughter will be offended.She has
been much with Father Clement, and has received notions about peace and
forgiveness which methinks suit ill with a country where the laws cannot
protect us, unless we have spirit to protect ourselves.If you determine
for the combat, I will do my best to persuade her to look on the matter
as the other good womanhood in the burgh will do; and if you resolve to
let the matter rest--the man who has lost his life for yours remaining
unavenged, the widow and the orphans without any reparation for the loss
of a husband and father--I will then do you the justice to think that I,
at least, ought not to think the worse of you for your patience, since
it was adopted for love of my child.But, Henry, we must in that case
remove ourselves from bonny St.Johnston, for here we will be but a
disgraced family."Henry groaned deeply, and was silent for an instant, then replied: "I
would rather be dead than dishonoured, though I should never see her
again!Had it been yester evening, I would have met the best blade among
these men at arms as blythely as ever I danced at a maypole.But today,
when she had first as good as said, 'Henry Smith, I love thee!'Father
Glover; it is very hard.I ought to have allowed him the shelter of my roof, when he
prayed me in his agony of fear; or; had I gone with him, I should then
have prevented or shared his fate.But I taunted him, ridiculed him,
loaded him with maledictions, though the saints know they were uttered
in idle peevishness of impatience.I drove him out from my doors, whom I
knew so helpless, to take the fate which was perhaps intended for me.I must avenge him, or be dishonoured for ever.See, father, I have been
called a man hard as the steel I work in.Does burnished steel ever drop
tears like these?Shame on me that I should shed them!""It is no shame, my dearest son," said Simon; "thou art as kind as
brave, and I have always known it.No one
may be discovered to whom suspicion attaches, and where none such is
found, the combat cannot take place.It is a hard thing to wish that the
innocent blood may not be avenged.But if the perpetrator of this foul
murder be hidden for the present, thou wilt be saved from the task
of seeking that vengeance which Heaven doubtless will take at its own
proper time."As they spoke thus, they arrived at the point of the High Street where
the council house was situated.As they reached the door, and made
their way through the multitude who thronged the street, they found the
avenues guarded by a select party of armed burghers, and about fifty
spears belonging to the Knight of Kinfauns, who, with his allies
the Grays, Blairs, Moncrieffs, and others, had brought to Perth a
considerable body of horse, of which these were a part.So soon as the
glover and smith presented themselves, they were admitted to the chamber
in which the magistrates were assembled.A woman wails for justice at the gate,
     A widow'd woman, wan and desolate.The council room of Perth presented a singular spectacle.In a gloomy
apartment, ill and inconveniently lighted by two windows of different
form and of unequal size, were assembled, around a large oaken table,
a group of men, of whom those who occupied the higher seats were
merchants, that is, guild brethren, or shopkeepers, arrayed in decent
dresses becoming their station, but most of them bearing, like, the
Regent York, "signs of war around their aged necks"--gorgets, namely,
and baldricks, which sustained their weapons.The lower places around
the table were occupied by mechanics and artisans, the presidents, or
deacons, as they were termed, of the working classes, in their ordinary
clothes, somewhat better arranged than usual.These, too, wore pieces
of armour of various descriptions.Some had the blackjack, or doublets
covered with small plates of iron of a lozenge shape, which, secured
through the upper angle, hung in rows above each [other], and which,
swaying with the motion of the wearer's person, formed a secure defence
to the body.Others had buff coats, which, as already mentioned, could
resist the blow of a sword, and even a lance's point, unless propelled
with great force.At the bottom of the table, surrounded as it was
with this varied assembly, sat Sir Louis Lundin; no military man, but
a priest and parson of St.John's, arrayed in his canonical dress, and
having his pen and ink before him.He was town clerk of the burgh,
and, like all the priests of the period (who were called from that
circumstance the Pope's knights), received the honourable title of
Dominus, contracted into Dom, or Dan, or translated into Sir, the title
of reverence due to the secular chivalry.On an elevated seat at the head of the council board was placed Sir
Patrick Charteris, in complete armour brightly burnished--a singular
contrast to the motley mixture of warlike and peaceful attire exhibited
by the burghers, who were only called to arms occasionally.The bearing
of the provost, while it completely admitted the intimate connexion
which mutual interests had created betwixt himself, the burgh, and the
magistracy, was at the same time calculated to assert the superiority
which, in virtue of gentle blood and chivalrous rank, the opinions of
the age assigned to him over the members of the assembly in which he
presided.Two squires stood behind him, one of them holding the knight's
pennon, and another his shield, bearing his armorial distinctions, being
a hand holding a dagger, or short sword, with the proud motto, "This is
my charter."A handsome page displayed the long sword of his master, and
another bore his lance; all which chivalrous emblems and appurtenances
were the more scrupulously exhibited, that the dignitary to whom they
belonged was engaged in discharging the office of a burgh magistrate.In his own person the Knight of Kinfauns appeared to affect something
of state and stiffness which did not naturally pertain to his frank and
jovial character."So you are come at length, Henry Smith and Simon Glover," said the
provost."Know that you have kept us waiting for your attendance.Should
it so chance again while we occupy this place, we will lay such a
fine on you as you will have small pleasure in paying.They are not asked now, and another time they will not
be admitted.Know, sirs, that our reverend clerk hath taken down in
writing, and at full length, what I will tell you in brief, that you may
see what is to be required of you, Henry Smith, in particular.Our
late fellow citizen, Oliver Proudfute, hath been found dead in the High
Street, close by the entrance into the wynd.It seemeth he was slain by
a heavy blow with a short axe, dealt from behind and at unawares;
and the act by which he fell can only be termed a deed of foul and
forethought murder.The criminal can only be
indicated by circumstances.It is recorded in the protocol of the
Reverend Sir Louis Lundin, that divers well reported witnesses saw our
deceased citizen, Oliver Proudfute, till a late period accompanying the
entry of the morrice dancers, of whom he was one, as far as the house of
Simon Glover, in Curfew Street, where they again played their pageant.It is also manifested that at this place he separated from the rest
of the band, after some discourse with Simon Glover, and made an
appointment to meet with the others of his company at the sign of the
Griffin, there to conclude the holiday.Now, Simon, I demand of you
whether this be truly stated, so far as you know?and further, what was
the purport of the defunct Oliver Proudfute's discourse with you?""My Lord Provost and very worshipful Sir Patrick," answered Simon
Glover, "you and this honourable council shall know that, touching
certain reports which had been made of the conduct of Henry Smith, some
quarrel had arisen between myself and another of my family and the said
Smith here present.Now, this our poor fellow citizen, Oliver Proudfute,
having been active in spreading these reports, as indeed his element lay
in such gossipred, some words passed betwixt him and me on the subject;
and, as I think, he left me with the purpose of visiting Henry Smith,
for he broke off from the morrice dancers, promising, as it seems, to
meet them, as your honour has said, at the sign of the Griffin, in order
to conclude the evening.But what he actually did, I know not, as I
never again saw him in life.""It is enough," said Sir Patrick, "and agrees with all that we have
heard.Now, worthy sirs, we next find our poor fellow citizen environed
by a set of revellers and maskers who had assembled in the High Street,
by whom he was shamefully ill treated, being compelled to kneel down
in the street, and there to quaff huge quantities of liquor against
his inclination, until at length he escaped from them by flight.This violence was accomplished with drawn swords, loud shouts, and
imprecations, so as to attract the attention of several persons, who,
alarmed by the tumult, looked out from their windows, as well as of one
or two passengers, who, keeping aloof from the light of the torches,
lest they also had been maltreated, beheld the usage which our fellow
citizen received in the High Street of the burgh.And although these
revellers were disguised, and used vizards, yet their disguises were
well known, being a set of quaint masking habits prepared some weeks
ago by command of Sir John Ramorny, Master of the Horse to his Royal
Highness the Duke of Rothsay, Prince Royal of Scotland.""Yes, so it is, brave burghers," continued Sir Patrick; "our inquiries
have led us into conclusions both melancholy and terrible.But as no one
can regret the point at which they seem likely to arrive more than I do,
so no man living can dread its consequences less.It is even so, various
artisans employed upon the articles have described the dresses prepared
for Sir John Ramorny's mask as being exactly similar to those of the
men by whom Oliver Proudfute was observed to be maltreated.And one
mechanic, being Wingfield the feather dresser, who saw the revellers
when they had our fellow citizen within their hands, remarked that they
wore the cinctures and coronals of painted feathers which he himself had
made by the order of the Prince's master of horse."After the moment of his escape from these revellers, we lose all trace
of Oliver' but we can prove that the maskers went to Sir John Ramorny's,
where they were admitted, after some show of delay.It is rumoured that
thou, Henry Smith, sawest our unhappy fellow citizen after he had been
in the hands of these revellers."He came to my house in the wynd," said Henry, "about half an hour
before midnight; and I admitted him, something unwillingly, as he had
been keeping carnival while I remained at home; and 'There is ill talk,'
says the proverb, 'betwixt a full man and a fasting.'""And in which plight seemed he when thou didst admit him?""He seemed," answered the smith, "out of breath, and talked repeatedly
of having been endangered by revellers.I paid but small regard, for he
was ever a timorous, chicken spirited, though well meaning, man, and
I held that he was speaking more from fancy than reality.But I shall
always account it for foul offence in myself that I did not give him my
company, which he requested; and if I live, I will found masses for his
soul, in expiation of my guilt."Sandra journeyed to the hallway."Did he describe those from whom he received the injury?""Revellers in masking habits," replied Henry."And did he intimate his fear of having to do with them on his return?""He alluded particularly to his being waylaid, which I treated as
visionary, having been able to see no one in the lane.""Had he then no help from thee of any kind whatsoever?""Yes, worshipful," replied the smith; "he exchanged his morrice dress
for my head piece, buff coat, and target, which I hear were found upon
his body; and I have at home his morrice cap and bells, with the jerkin
and other things pertaining.He was to return my garb of fence, and get
back his own masking suit this day, had the saints so permitted.""One word more," said the provost."Have you any reason to think that
the blow which slew Oliver Proudfute was meant for another man?""I have," answered the smith; "but it is doubtful, and may be dangerous
to add such a conjecture, which is besides only a supposition.""Speak it out, on your burgher faith and oath.For whom, think you, was
the blow meant?""If I must speak," replied Henry, "I believe Oliver Proudfute received
the fate which was designed for myself; the rather that, in his folly,
Oliver spoke of trying to assume my manner of walking, as well as my
dress.""Have you feud with any one, that you form such an idea?""To my shame and sin be it spoken, I have feud with Highland and
Lowland, English and Scot, Perth and Angus.I do not believe poor
Oliver had feud with a new hatched chicken.he was the more fully
prepared for a sudden call!""Hark ye, smith," said the provost, "answer me distinctly: Is there
cause of feud between the household of Sir John Ramorny and yourself?""To a certainty, my lord, there is.It is now generally said that Black
Quentin, who went over Tay to Fife some days since, was the owner of the
hand which was found in Couvrefew Street upon the eve of St.It was I who struck off that hand with a blow of my broadsword.As this
Black Quentin was a chamberlain of Sir John, and much trusted, it is
like there must be feud between me and his master's dependants.""It bears a likely front, smith," said Sir Patrick Charteris."And now,
good brothers and wise magistrates, there are two suppositions, each of
which leads to the same conclusion.The maskers who seized our fellow
citizen, and misused him in a manner of which his body retains some
slight marks, may have met with their former prisoner as he returned
homewards, and finished their ill usage by taking his life.He himself
expressed to Henry Gow fears that this would be the case.If this be
really true, one or more of Sir John Ramorny's attendants must have
been the assassins.But I think it more likely that one or two of the
revellers may have remained on the field, or returned to it, having
changed perhaps their disguise, and that to those men (for Oliver
Proudfute, in his own personal appearance, would only have been a
subject of sport) his apparition in the dress, and assuming, as he
proposed to do, the manner, of Henry Smith, was matter of deep hatred;
and that, seeing him alone, they had taken, as they thought, a certain
and safe mode to rid themselves of an enemy so dangerous as all men know
Henry Wynd is accounted by those that are his unfriends.The same train
of reasoning, again, rests the guilt with the household of Sir John
Ramorny.Are we not free to charge the crime upon
them?"The magistrates whispered together for several minutes, and then replied
by the voice of Bailie Craigdallie: "Noble knight, and our worthy
provost, we agree entirely in what your wisdom has spoken concerning
this dark and bloody matter; nor do we doubt your sagacity in tracing to
the fellowship and the company of John Ramorny of that ilk the villainy
which hath been done to our deceased fellow citizen, whether in his own
character and capacity or as mistaking him for our brave townsman, Henry
of the Wynd.But Sir John, in his own behalf, and as the Prince's master
of the horse, maintains an extensive household; and as, of course, the
charge will be rebutted by a denial, we would ask how we shall proceed
in that case.It is true, could we find law for firing the lodging, and
putting all within it to the sword; the old proverb of 'Short rede,
good rede,' might here apply; for a fouler household of defiers of God,
destroyers of men, and debauchers of women are nowhere sheltered than
are in Ramorny's band.But I doubt that this summary mode of execution
would scarce be borne out by the laws; and no tittle of evidence which
I have heard will tend to fix the crime on any single individual or
individuals."Before the provost could reply, the town clerk arose, and, stroking
his venerable beard, craved permission to speak, which was instantly
granted."Brethren," he said, "as well in our fathers' time as ours; hath God, on
being rightly appealed to, condescended to make manifest the crimes of
the guilty and the innocence of those who may have been rashly accused.Let us demand from our sovereign lord, King Robert, who, when the wicked
do not interfere to pervert his good intentions, is as just and clement
a prince as our annals can show in their long line, in the name of the
Fair City, and of all the commons in Scotland, that he give us, after
the fashion of our ancestors, the means of appealing to Heaven for light
upon this dark murder, we will demand the proof by 'bier right,' often
granted in the days of our sovereign's ancestors, approved of by bulls
and decretals, and administered by the great Emperor Charlemagne in
France, by King Arthur in Britain, and by Gregory the Great, and the
mighty Achaius, in this our land of Scotland.""I have heard of the bier right, Sir Louis," quoth the provost, "and I
know we have it in our charters of the Fair City; but I am something
ill learned in the ancient laws, and would pray you to inform us more
distinctly of its nature.""We will demand of the King," said Sir Louis Lundin, "my advice being
taken, that the body of our murdered fellow citizen be transported into
the High Church of St.John, and suitable masses said for the benefit
of his soul and for the discovery of his foul murder.Meantime, we shall
obtain an order that Sir John Ramorny give up a list of such of his
household as were in Perth in the course of the night between Fastern's
Even and this Ash Wednesday, and become bound to present them on a
certain day and hour, to be early named, in the High Church of St.John,
there one by one to pass before the bier of our murdered fellow citizen,
and in the form prescribed to call upon God and His saints to bear
witness that he is innocent of the acting, art or part, of the murder.And credit me, as has been indeed proved by numerous instances, that, if
the murderer shall endeavour to shroud himself by making such an appeal,
the antipathy which subsists between the dead body and the hand which
dealt the fatal blow that divorced it from the soul will awaken some
imperfect life, under the influence of which the veins of the dead man
will pour forth at the fatal wounds the blood which has been so long
stagnant in the veins.Or, to speak more certainly, it is the pleasure
of Heaven, by some hidden agency which we cannot comprehend, to leave
open this mode of discovering the wickedness of him who has defaced the
image of his Creator.""I have heard this law talked of," said Sir Patrick, "and it was
enforced in the Bruce's time.This surely is no unfit period to seek, by
such a mystic mode of inquiry, the truth to which no ordinary means can
give us access, seeing that a general accusation of Sir John's household
would full surely be met by a general denial.Yet I must crave farther
of Sir Louis, our reverend town clerk, how we shall prevent the guilty
person from escaping in the interim?""The burghers will maintain a strict watch upon the wall, drawbridges
shall be raised and portcullises lowered, from sunset to sunrise, and
strong patrols maintained through the night.This guard the burghers
will willingly maintain, to secure against the escape of the murderer of
their townsman."The rest of the counsellors acquiesced, by word, sign, and look, in this
proposal."Again," said the provost, "what if any one of the suspected household
refuse to submit to the ordeal of bier right?""He may appeal to that of combat," said the reverend city scribe, "with
an opponent of equal rank; because the accused person must have his
choice, in the appeal to the judgment of God, by what ordeal he will
be tried.But if he refuses both, he must be held as guilty, and so
punished."The sages of the council unanimously agreed with the opinion of their
provost and town clerk, and resolved, in all formality, to petition
the King, as a matter of right, that the murder of their fellow citizen
should be inquired into according to this ancient form, which was held
to manifest the truth, and received as matter of evidence in case of
murder so late as towards the end of the 17th century.But before the
meeting dissolved, Bailie Craigdallie thought it meet to inquire who
was to be the champion of Maudie, or Magdalen, Proudfute and her two
children."There need be little inquiry about that," said Sir Patrick Charteris;
"we are men, and wear swords, which should be broken over the head
of any one amongst us who will not draw it in behalf of the widow and
orphans of our murdered fellow citizen, and in brave revenge of his
death.If Sir John Ramorny shall personally resent the inquiry, Patrick
Charteris of Kinfauns will do battle with him to the outrance, whilst
horse and man may stand, or spear and blade hold together.But in case
the challenger be of yeomanly degree, well wot I that Magdalen Proudfute
may choose her own champion among the bravest burghers of Perth, and
shame and dishonour were it to the Fair City for ever could she light
upon one who were traitor and coward enough to say her nay!Bring her
hither, that she may make her election."Henry Smith heard this with a melancholy anticipation that the poor
woman's choice would light upon him, and that his recent reconciliation
with his mistress would be again dissolved, by his being engaged in a
fresh quarrel, from which there lay no honourable means of escape, and
which, in any other circumstances, he would have welcomed as a glorious
opportunity of distinguishing himself, both in sight of the court and
of the city.He was aware that, under the tuition of Father Clement,
Catharine viewed the ordeal of battle rather as an insult to religion
than an appeal to the Deity, and did not consider it as reasonable that
superior strength of arm or skill of weapon should be resorted to as the
proof of moral guilt or innocence.He had, therefore, much to fear from
her peculiar opinions in this particular, refined as they were beyond
those of the age she lived in.While he thus suffered under these contending feelings, Magdalen,
the widow of the slaughtered man, entered the court, wrapt in a deep
mourning veil, and followed and supported by five or six women of good
(that is, of respectability) dressed in the same melancholy attire.One
of her attendants held an infant in her arms, the last pledge of poor
Oliver's nuptial affections.Another led a little tottering creature of
two years, or thereabouts, which looked with wonder and fear, sometimes
on the black dress in which they had muffled him, and sometimes on the
scene around him.The assembly rose to receive the melancholy group, and saluted them with
an expression of the deepest sympathy, which Magdalen, though the mate
of poor Oliver, returned with an air of dignity, which she borrowed,
perhaps, from the extremity of her distress.Sir Patrick Charteris then
stepped forward, and with the courtesy of a knight to a female, and of a
protector to an oppressed and injured widow, took the poor woman's hand,
and explained to her briefly by what course the city had resolved to
follow out the vengeance due for her husband's slaughter.Having, with a softness and gentleness which did not belong to his
general manner, ascertained that the unfortunate woman perfectly
understood what was meant, he said aloud to the assembly: "Good citizens
of Perth, and freeborn men of guild and craft, attend to what is
about to pass, for it concerns your rights and privileges.Here stands
Magdalen Proudfute, desirous to follow forth the revenge due for the
death of her husband, foully murdered, as she sayeth, by Sir John
Ramorny, Knight, of that Ilk, and which she offers to prove, by the
evidence of bier right, or by the body of a man.Therefore, I, Patrick
Charteris, being a belted knight and freeborn gentleman, offer myself to
do battle in her just quarrel, whilst man and horse may endure, if any
one of my degree shall lift my glove.How say you, Magdalen Proudfute,
will you accept me for your champion?"The widow answered with difficulty: "I can desire none nobler."Sir Patrick then took her right hand in his, and, kissing her forehead,
for such was the ceremony, said solemnly: "So may God and St.John
prosper me at my need, as I will do my devoir as your champion,
knightly, truly, and manfully.Go now, Magdalen, and choose at your will
among the burgesses of the Fair City, present or absent, any one upon
whom you desire to rest your challenge, if he against whom you bring
plaint shall prove to be beneath my degree."All eyes were turned to Henry Smith, whom the general voice had already
pointed out as in every respect the fittest to act as champion on the
occasion.But the widow waited not for the general prompting of their
looks.As soon as Sir Patrick had spoken, she crossed the floor to the
place where, near the bottom of the table, the armourer stood among the
men of his degree, and took him by the hand."Henry Gow, or Smith," she said, "good burgher and draftsman, my--my--"

"Husband," she would have said, but the word would not come forth: she
was obliged to change the expression."He who is gone, loved and prized you over all men; therefore meet it is
that thou shouldst follow out the quarrel of his widow and orphans."If there had been a possibility, which in that age there was not, of
Henry's rejecting or escaping from a trust for which all men seemed to
destine him, every wish and idea of retreat was cut off when the widow
began to address him; and a command from Heaven could hardly have made a
stronger impression than did the appeal of the unfortunate Magdalen.Her
allusion to his intimacy with the deceased moved him to the soul.During
Oliver's life, doubtless, there had been a strain of absurdity in his
excessive predilection for Henry, which, considering how very different
they were in character, had in it something ludicrous.But all this
was now forgotten, and Henry, giving way to his natural ardour, only
remembered that Oliver had been his friend and intimate--a man who had
loved and honoured him as much as he was capable of entertaining such
sentiments for any one, and, above all, that there was much reason to
suspect that the deceased had fallen victim to a blow meant for Henry
himself.It was, therefore, with an alacrity which, the minute before, he could
scarce have commanded, and which seemed to express a stern pleasure,
that, having pressed his lips to the cold brow of the unhappy Magdalen,
the armourer replied:

"I, Henry the Smith, dwelling in the Wynd of Perth, good man and true,
and freely born, accept the office of champion to this widow Magdalen
and these orphans, and will do battle in their quarrel to the death,
with any man whomsoever of my own degree, and that so long as I shall
draw breath.So help me at my need God and good St.There arose from the audience a half suppressed cry, expressing the
interest which the persons present took in the prosecution of the
quarrel, and their confidence in the issue.Sir Patrick Charteris then took measures for repairing to the King's
presence, and demanding leave to proceed with inquiry into the murder
of Oliver Proudfute, according to the custom of bier right, and, if
necessary, by combat.He performed this duty after the town council had dissolved, in a
private interview between himself and the King, who heard of this new
trouble with much vexation, and appointed next morning, after mass,
for Sir Patrick and the parties interested to attend his pleasure in
council.In the mean time, a royal pursuivant was despatched to the
Constable's lodgings, to call over the roll of Sir John Ramorny's
attendants, and charge him, with his whole retinue, under high
penalties, to abide within Perth until the King's pleasure should be
farther known.In God's name, see the lists and all things fit;
     There let them end it--God defend the right!In the same council room of the conventual palace of the Dominicans,
King Robert was seated with his brother Albany, whose affected austerity
of virtue, and real art and dissimulation, maintained so high an
influence over the feeble minded monarch.It was indeed natural that one
who seldom saw things according to their real forms and outlines should
view them according to the light in which they were presented to him by
a bold, astucious man, possessing the claim of such near relationship.Ever anxious on account of his misguided and unfortunate son, the King
was now endeavouring to make Albany coincide in opinion with him in
exculpating Rothsay from any part in the death of the bonnet maker, the
precognition concerning which had been left by Sir Patrick Charteris for
his Majesty's consideration."This is an unhappy matter, brother Robin," he said--"a most unhappy
occurrence, and goes nigh to put strife and quarrel betwixt the nobility
and the commons here, as they have been at war together in so many
distant lands.I see but one cause of comfort in the matter, and that
is, that Sir John Ramorny having received his dismissal from the Duke of
Rothsay's family, it cannot be said that he or any of his people who may
have done this bloody deed--if it has truly been done by them--have been
encouraged or hounded out upon such an errand by my poor boy.I am sure,
brother, you and I can bear witness how readily, upon my entreaties, he
agreed to dismiss Ramorny from his service, on account of that brawl in
Curfew Street.""I remember his doing so," said Albany; "and well do I hope that the
connexion betwixt the Prince and Ramorny has not been renewed since he
seemed to comply with your Grace's wishes.""What mean you
by these expressions, brother?Surely, when David promised to me that,
if that unhappy matter of Curfew Street were but smothered up and
concealed, he would part with Ramorny, as he was a counsellor thought
capable of involving him in similar fooleries, and would acquiesce
in our inflicting on him either exile or such punishment as it should
please us to impose--surely you cannot doubt that he was sincere in his
professions, and would keep his word?Remember you not that, when you
advised that a heavy fine should be levied upon his estate in Fife in
lieu of banishment, the Prince himself seemed to say that exile would be
better for Ramorny, and even for himself?""I remember it well, my royal brother.Nor, truly, could I have
suspected Ramorny of having so much influence over the Prince, after
having been accessory to placing him in a situation so perilous, had
it not been for my royal kinsman's own confession, alluded to by your
Grace, that, if suffered to remain at court, he might still continue to
influence his conduct.I then regretted I had advised a fine in place
of exile.But that time is passed, and now new mischief has occurred,
fraught with much peril to your Majesty, as well as to your royal heir,
and to the whole kingdom."by the soul of Bruce, our immortal ancestor!I entreat thee, my
dearest brother, to take compassion on me.Tell me what evil threatens
my son, or my kingdom?"The features of the King, trembling with anxiety, and his eyes brimful
of tears, were bent upon his brother, who seemed to assume time for
consideration ere he replied.Your Grace believed that the Prince had
no accession to this second aggression upon the citizens of Perth--the
slaughter of this bonnet making fellow, about whose death they clamour,
as a set of gulls about their comrade, when one of the noisy brood is
struck down by a boor's shaft.""Their lives," said the King, "are dear to themselves and their friends,
Robin.""Truly, ay, my liege; and they make them dear to us too, ere we can
settle with the knaves for the least blood wit.But, as I said, your
Majesty thinks the Prince had no share in this last slaughter; I will
not attempt to shake your belief in that delicate point, but will
endeavour to believe along with you.What you think is rule for me,
Robert of Albany will never think otherwise than Robert of broad
Scotland.""Thank you, thank you," said the King, taking his brother's hand."I
knew I might rely that your affection would do justice to poor heedless
Rothsay, who exposes himself to so much misconstruction that he scarcely
deserves the sentiments you feel for him."Albany had such an immovable constancy of purpose, that he was able to
return the fraternal pressure of the King's hand, while tearing up by
the very roots the hopes of the indulgent, fond old man.the Duke continued, with a sigh, "this burly, intractable
Knight of Kinfauns, and his brawling herd of burghers, will not view the
matter as we do.They have the boldness to say that this dead fellow had
been misused by Rothsay and his fellows, who were in the street in mask
and revel, stopping men and women, compelling them to dance, or to drink
huge quantities of wine, with other follies needless to recount; and
they say that the whole party repaired in Sir John Ramorny's, and broke
their way into the house in order to conclude their revel there, thus
affording good reason to judge that the dismissal of Sir John from the
Prince's service was but a feigned stratagem to deceive the public.And
hence they urge that, if ill were done that night by Sir John Ramorny
or his followers, much it is to be thought that the Duke of Rothsay must
have at least been privy to, if he did not authorise, it.""Would they make a murderer
of my boy?would they pretend my David would soil his hands in Scottish
blood without having either provocation or purpose?No--no, they will
not invent calumnies so broad as these, for they are flagrant and
incredible.""Pardon, my liege," answered the Duke of Albany; "they say the cause
of quarrel which occasioned the riot in Curfew Street, and, its
consequences, were more proper to the Prince than to Sir John, since
none suspects, far less believes, that that hopeful enterprise was
conducted for the gratification of the knight of Ramorny.""Thou drivest me mad, Robin!""I am dumb," answered his brother; "I did but speak my poor mind
according to your royal order.""Thou meanest well, I know," said the King; "but, instead of tearing me
to pieces with the display of inevitable calamities, were it not kinder,
Robin, to point me out some mode to escape from them?""True, my liege; but as the only road of extrication is rough and
difficult, it is necessary your Grace should be first possessed with
the absolute necessity of using it, ere you hear it even described.The
chirurgeon must first convince his patient of the incurable condition of
a shattered member, ere he venture to name amputation, though it be the
only remedy."The King at these words was roused to a degree of alarm and indignation
greater than his brother had deemed he could be awakened to."Shattered and mortified member, my Lord of Albany!These are unintelligible words, my lord.If thou appliest them
to our son Rothsay, thou must make them good to the letter, else mayst
thou have bitter cause to rue the consequence.""You construe me too literally, my royal liege," said Albany."I spoke
not of the Prince in such unbeseeming terms, for I call Heaven to
witness that he is dearer to me as the son of a well beloved brother
than had he been son of my own.But I spoke in regard to separating him
from the follies and vanities of life, which holy men say are like to
mortified members, and ought, like them, to be cut off and thrown from
us, as things which interrupt our progress in better things.""I understand--thou wouldst have this Ramorny, who hath been thought the
instrument of my son's follies, exiled from court," said the relieved
monarch, "until these unhappy scandals are forgotten, and our subjects
are disposed to look upon our son with different and more confiding
eyes.""That were good counsel, my liege; but mine went a little--a very
little--farther.I would have the Prince himself removed for some brief
period from court."part with my child, my firstborn, the light of my eyes,
and--wilful as he is--the darling of my heart!"Nay, I did but suggest, my lord; I am sensible of the wound such a
proceeding must inflict on a parent's heart, for am I not myself a
father?"And he hung his head, as if in hopeless despondency.When I think that even our own
influence over him, which, sometimes forgotten in our absence, is ever
effectual whilst he is with us, is by your plan to be entirely removed,
what perils might he not rush upon?I could not sleep in his absence--I
should hear his death groan in every breeze; and you, Albany, though you
conceal it better, would be nearly as anxious."Thus spoke the facile monarch, willing to conciliate his brother and
cheat himself, by taking it for granted that an affection, of which
there were no traces, subsisted betwixt the uncle and nephew."Your paternal apprehensions are too easily alarmed, my lord," said
Albany."I do not propose to leave the disposal of the Prince's motions
to his own wild pleasure.I understand that the Prince is to be placed
for a short time under some becoming restraint--that he should
be subjected to the charge of some grave counsellor, who must be
responsible both for his conduct and his safety, as a tutor for his
pupil."a tutor, and at Rothsay's age!"exclaimed the' King; "he is two
years beyond the space to which our laws limit the term of nonage.""The wiser Romans," said Albany, "extended it for four years after the
period we assign; and, in common sense, the right of control ought to
last till it be no longer necessary, and so the time ought to vary with
the disposition.Here is young Lindsay, the Earl of Crawford, who they
say gives patronage to Ramorny on this appeal.He is a lad of fifteen,
with the deep passions and fixed purpose of a man of thirty; while my
royal nephew, with much more amiable and noble qualities both of head
and heart, sometimes shows, at twenty-three years of age, the wanton
humours of a boy, towards whom restraint may be kindness.And do not
be discouraged that it is so, my liege, or angry with your brother for
telling the truth; since the best fruits are those that are slowest in
ripening, and the best horses such as give most trouble to the grooms
who train them for the field or lists."The Duke stopped, and, after suffering King Robert to indulge for two
or three minutes in a reverie which he did not attempt to interrupt, he
added, in a more lively tone: "But, cheer up, my noble liege; perhaps
the feud may be made up without farther fighting or difficulty.The
widow is poor, for her husband, though he was much employed, had idle
and costly habits.The matter may be therefore redeemed for money, and
the amount of an assythment may be recovered out of Ramorny's estate.""Nay, that we will ourselves discharge," said King Robert, eagerly
catching at the hope of a pacific termination of this unpleasing debate."Ramorny's prospects will be destroyed by his being sent from court
and deprived of his charge in Rothsay's household, and it would be
ungenerous to load a falling man.But here comes our secretary, the
prior, to tell us the hour of council approaches."Benedicite, my royal liege," answered the abbot."Now, good father," continued the King, "without waiting for Rothsay,
whose accession to our counsels we will ourselves guarantee, proceed we
to the business of our kingdom."He has arrived at his castle of Tantallon, my liege, and has sent a
post to say, that, though the Earl of March remains in sullen seclusion
in his fortress of Dunbar, his friends and followers are gathering and
forming an encampment near Coldingham, Where it is supposed they intend
to await the arrival of a large force of English, which Hotspur and Sir
Ralph Percy are assembling on the English frontier.""That is cold news," said the King; "and may God forgive George of
Dunbar!"The Prince entered as he spoke, and he continued: "Ha!thou art here at
length, Rothsay; I saw thee not at mass.""I was an idler this morning," said the Prince, "having spent a restless
and feverish night."answered the King; "hadst thou not been over restless
on Fastern's Eve, thou hadst not been feverish on the night of Ash
Wednesday.""Let me not interrupt your praying, my liege," said the Prince,
lightly."Your Grace Was invoking Heaven in behalf of some one--an enemy
doubtless, for these have the frequent advantage of your orisons.""Sit down and be at peace, foolish youth!"said his father, his eye
resting at the same time on the handsome face and graceful figure of
his favourite son.Rothsay drew a cushion near to his father's feet, and
threw himself carelessly down upon it, while the King resumed."I was regretting that the Earl of March, having separated warm from
my hand with full assurance that he should receive compensation for
everything which he could complain of as injurious, should have been
capable of caballing with Northumberland against his own country.Is it
possible he could doubt our intentions to make good our word?""I will answer for him--no," said the Prince."March never doubted your
Highness's word.Marry, he may well have made question whether your
learned counsellors would leave your Majesty the power of keeping it."Robert the Third had adopted to a great extent the timid policy of not
seeming to hear expressions which, being heard, required, even in his
own eyes, some display of displeasure.He passed on, therefore, in his
discourse, without observing his son's speech, but in private Rothsay's
rashness augmented the displeasure which his father began to entertain
against him."It is well the Douglas is on the marches," said the King."His
breast, like those of his ancestors, has ever been the best bulwark of
Scotland.""Then woe betide us if he should turn his back to the enemy," said the
incorrigible Rothsay."Dare you impeach the courage of Douglas?"replied the King, extremely
chafed."No man dare question the Earl's courage," said Rothsay, "it is as
certain as his pride; but his luck may be something doubted."Andrew, David," exclaimed his father, "thou art like a screech
owl, every word thou sayest betokens strife and calamity.""I am silent, father," answered the youth.continued the King,
addressing the prior."I trust they have assumed a favourable aspect," answered the clergyman."The fire which threatened the whole country is likely to be drenched
out by the blood of some forty or fifty kerne; for the two great
confederacies have agreed, by solemn indenture of arms, to decided their
quarrel with such weapons as your Highness may name, and in your royal
presence, in such place as shall be appointed, on the 30th of March next
to come, being Palm Sunday; the number of combatants being limited to
thirty on each side; and the fight to be maintained to extremity, since
they affectionately make humble suit and petition to your Majesty that
you will parentally condescend to waive for the day your royal privilege
of interrupting the combat, by flinging down of truncheon or crying of
'Ho!'until the battle shall be utterly fought to an end."exclaimed the King, "would they limit our best and
dearest royal privilege, that of putting a stop to strife, and crying
truce to battle?Will they remove the only motive which could bring me
to the butcherly spectacle of their combat?Would they fight like men,
or like their own mountain wolves?""My lord," said Albany, "the Earl of Crawford and I had presumed,
without consulting you, to ratify that preliminary, for the adoption of
which we saw much and pressing reason.""Methinks he is a young
counsellor on such grave occurrents.""He is," replied Albany, "notwithstanding his early years, of such
esteem among his Highland neighbours, that I could have done little with
them but for his aid and influence."said the King reproachfully to his heir."I pity Crawford, sire," replied the Prince."He has too early lost a
father whose counsels would have better become such a season as this."The King turned next towards Albany with a look of triumph, at the
filial affection which his son displayed in his reply."It is not the life of these
Highlandmen, but their death, which is to be profitable to this
commonwealth of Scotland; and truly it seemed to the Earl of Crawford
and myself most desirable that the combat should be a strife of
extermination.""Marry," said the Prince, "if such be the juvenile policy of Lindsay, he
will be a merciful ruler some ten or twelve years hence!Out upon a boy
that is hard of heart before he has hair upon his lip!Better he had
contented himself with fighting cocks on Fastern's Even than laying
schemes for massacring men on Palm Sunday, as if he were backing a Welsh
main, where all must fight to death.""Rothsay is right, Albany," said the King: "it were unlike a Christian
monarch to give way in this point.I cannot consent to see men battle
until they are all hewn down like cattle in the shambles.It would
sicken me to look at it, and the warder would drop from my hand for mere
lack of strength to hold it.""It would drop unheeded," said Albany."Let me entreat your Grace to
recollect, that you only give up a royal privilege which, exercised,
would win you no respect, since it would receive no obedience.Were your
Majesty to throw down your warder when the war is high, and these men's
blood is hot, it would meet no more regard than if a sparrow should drop
among a herd of battling wolves the straw which he was carrying to his
nest.Nothing will separate them but the exhaustion of slaughter; and
better they sustain it at the hands of each other than from the swords
of such troops as might attempt to separate them at your Majesty's
commands.An attempt to keep the peace by violence would be construed
into an ambush laid for them; both parties would unite to resist it, the
slaughter would be the same, and the hoped for results of future peace
would be utterly disappointed.""There is even too much truth in what you say, brother Robin," replied
the flexible King."To little purpose is it to command what I cannot
enforce; and, although I have the unhappiness to do so each day of
my life, it were needless to give such a very public example of royal
impotency before the crowds who may assemble to behold this spectacle.Let these savage men, therefore, work their bloody will to the uttermost
upon each other: I will not attempt to forbid what I cannot prevent them
from executing.I will to my oratory
and pray for her, since to aid her by hand and head is alike denied to
me.Father prior, I pray the support of your arm.""Nay, but, brother," said Albany, "forgive me if I remind you that we
must hear the matter between the citizens of Perth and Ramorny, about
the death of a townsman--"

"True--true," said the monarch, reseating himself; "more violence--more
battle.if the best blood of thy bravest
children could enrich thy barren soil, what land on earth would excel
thee in fertility!When is it that a white hair is seen on the beard of
a Scottishman, unless he be some wretch like thy sovereign, protected
from murder by impotence, to witness the scenes of slaughter to which he
cannot put a period?They are in haste
to kill, and, grudge each other each fresh breath of their Creator's
blessed air.The demon of strife and slaughter hath possessed the whole
land!"As the mild prince threw himself back on his seat with an air of
impatience and anger not very usual with him, the door at the lower end
of the room was unclosed, and, advancing from the gallery into which
it led (where in perspective was seen a guard of the Bute men, or
Brandanes, under arms), came, in mournful procession, the widow of poor
Oliver, led by Sir Patrick Charteris, with as much respect as if she had
been a lady of the first rank.Behind them came two women of good, the
wives of magistrates of the city, both in mourning garments, one bearing
the infant and the other leading the elder child.The smith followed in
his best attire, and wearing over his buff coat a scarf of crape.Bailie
Craigdallie and a brother magistrate closed the melancholy procession,
exhibiting similar marks of mourning.The good King's transitory passion was gone the instant he looked at
the pallid countenance of the sorrowing widow, and beheld the
unconsciousness of the innocent orphans who had sustained so great a
loss, and when Sir Patrick Charteris had assisted Magdalen Proudfute to
kneel down and, still holding her hand, kneeled himself on one knee,
it was with a sympathetic tone that King Robert asked her name and
business.She made no answer, but muttered something, looking towards
her conductor."Speak for the poor woman, Sir Patrick Charteris," said the King, "and
tell us the cause of her seeking our presence.""So please you, my liege," answered Sir Patrick, rising up, "this woman,
and these unhappy orphans, make plaint to your Highness upon Sir John
Ramorny of Ramorny, Knight, that by him, or by some of his household,
her umquhile husband, Oliver Proudfute, freeman and burgess of Perth,
was slain upon the streets of the city on the eve of Shrove Tuesday or
morning of Ash Wednesday.""Woman," replied the King, with much kindness, "thou art gentle by sex,
and shouldst be pitiful even by thy affliction; for our own calamity
ought to make us--nay, I think it doth make us--merciful to others.Thy
husband hath only trodden the path appointed to us all.""In his case," said the widow, "my liege must remember it has been a
brief and a bloody one."But since I have been unable to
protect him, as I confess was my royal duty, I am willing, in atonement,
to support thee and these orphans, as well or better than you lived in
the days of your husband; only do thou pass from this charge, and be
not the occasion of spilling more life.Remember, I put before you the
choice betwixt practising mercy and pursuing vengeance, and that betwixt
plenty and penury.""It is true, my liege, we are poor," answered the widow, with unshaken
firmness "but I and my children will feed with the beasts of the field
ere we live on the price of my husband's blood.I demand the combat by
my champion, as you are belted knight and crowned king.""In Scotland
the first words stammered by an infant and the last uttered by a dying
greybeard are 'combat--blood--revenge.'He was dressed in a long furred
robe, such as men of quality wore when they were unarmed.Concealed by
the folds of drapery, his wounded arm was supported by a scarf or
sling of crimson silk, and with the left arm he leaned on a youth,
who, scarcely beyond the years of boyhood, bore on his brow the deep
impression of early thought and premature passion.This was that
celebrated Lindsay, Earl of Crawford, who, in his after days, was known
by the epithet of the Tiger Earl, and who ruled the great and rich
valley of Strathmore with the absolute power and unrelenting cruelty of
a feudal tyrant.Two or three gentlemen, friends of the Earl, or of his
own, countenanced Sir John Ramorny by their presence on this occasion.The charge was again stated, and met by a broad denial on the part
of the accused; and in reply, the challengers offered to prove their
assertion by an appeal to the ordeal of bier right."I am not bound," answered Sir John Ramorny, "to submit to this ordeal,
since I can prove, by the evidence of my late royal master, that I was
in my own lodgings, lying on my bed, ill at ease, while this provost and
these bailies pretend I was committing a crime to which I had neither
will nor temptation.I can therefore be no just object of suspicion.""I can aver," said the Prince, "that I saw and conversed with Sir John
Ramorny about some matters concerning my own household on the very night
when this murder was a-doing.I therefore know that he was ill at ease,
and could not in person commit the deed in question.But I know nothing
of the employment of his attendants, and will not take it upon me to say
that some one of them may not have been guilty of the crime now charged
on them."Sir John Ramorny had, during the beginning of this speech, looked
round with an air of defiance, which was somewhat disconcerted by the
concluding sentence of Rothsay's speech."I thank your Highness," he said, with a smile, "for your cautious and
limited testimony in my behalf.He was wise who wrote, 'Put not your
faith in princes.'""If you have no other evidence of your innocence, Sir John Ramorny,"
said the King, "we may not, in respect to your followers, refuse to
the injured widow and orphans, the complainers, the grant of a proof by
ordeal of bier right, unless any of them should prefer that of combat.For yourself, you are, by the Prince's evidence, freed from the
attaint.""My liege," answered Sir John, "I can take warrant upon myself for the
innocence of my household and followers.""Why, so a monk or a woman might speak," said Sir Patrick Charteris."In
knightly language, wilt thou, Sir John de Ramorny, do battle with me in
the behalf of thy followers?""The provost of Perth had not obtained time to name the word combat,"
said Ramorny, "ere I would have accepted it.But I am not at present fit
to hold a lance.""I am glad of it, under your favour, Sir John.There will be the less
bloodshed," said the King."You must therefore produce your followers
according to your steward's household book, in the great church of
St.John, that, in presence of all whom it may concern, they may purge
themselves of this accusation.See that every man of them do appear at
the time of high mass, otherwise your honour may be sorely tainted.""They shall attend to a man," said Sir John Ramorny.Then bowing low to the King, he directed himself to the young Duke of
Rothsay, and, making a deep obeisance, spoke so as to be heard by him
alone."You have used me generously, my lord!One word of your lips
could have ended this controversy, and you have refused to speak it.""On my life," whispered the Prince, "I spake as far as the extreme verge
of truth and conscience would permit.I think thou couldst not expect
I should frame lies for thee; and after all, John, in my broken
recollections of that night, I do bethink me of a butcherly looking
mute, with a curtal axe, much like such a one as may have done yonder
night job.Ramorny made no answer, but turned as precipitately as if some one had
pressed suddenly on his wounded arm, and regained his lodgings with
the Earl of Crawford; to whom, though disposed for anything rather than
revelry, he was obliged to offer a splendid collation, to acknowledge
in some degree his sense of the countenance which the young noble had
afforded him.In pottingry he wrocht great pyne;
     He murdreit mony in medecyne.When, after an entertainment the prolonging of which was like torture to
the wounded knight, the Earl of Crawford at length took horse, to go
to his distant quarters in the Castle of Dupplin, where he resided as
a guest, the Knight of Ramorny retired into his sleeping apartment,
agonized by pains of body and anxiety of mind.Here he found Henbane
Dwining, on whom it was his hard fate to depend for consolation in both
respects.The physician, with his affectation of extreme humility, hoped
he saw his exalted patient merry and happy."Merry as a mad dog," said Ramorny, "and happy as the wretch whom the
cur hath bitten, and who begins to feel the approach of the ravening
madness!That ruthless boy, Crawford, saw my agony, and spared not a
single carouse.I must do him justice, forsooth!If I had done justice
to him and to the world, I had thrown him out of window and cut short
a career which, if he grew up as he has begun, will prove a source of
misery to all Scotland, but especially to Tayside.Take heed as thou
undoest the ligatures, chirurgeon, the touch of a fly's wing on that raw
glowing stump were like a dagger to me.""Fear not, my noble patron," said the leech, with a chuckling laugh
of enjoyment, which he vainly endeavoured to disguise under a tone of
affected sensibility."We will apply some fresh balsam, and--he, he,
he!--relieve your knightly honour of the irritation which you sustain so
firmly."said Ramorny, grinning with pain; "I sustain it as I
would the scorching flames of purgatory.The bone seems made of red hot
iron; thy greasy ointment will hiss as it drops upon the wound.And yet
it is December's ice, compared to the fever fit of my mind!""We will first use our emollients upon the body, my noble patron," said
Dwining; "and then, with your knighthood's permission; your servant will
try his art on the troubled mind; though I fain hope even the mental
pain also may in some degree depend on the irritation of the wound, and
that, abated as I trust the corporeal pangs will soon be, perhaps the
stormy feelings of the mind may subside of themselves.""Henbane Dwining," said the patient, as he felt the pain of his wound
assuaged, "thou art a precious and invaluable leech, but some things
are beyond thy power.Thou canst stupify my bodily cause of this raging
agony, but thou canst not teach me to bear the score of the boy whom I
have brought up--whom I loved, Dwining--for I did love him--dearly love
him!The worst of my ill deeds have been to flatter his vices; and he
grudged me a word of his mouth, when a word would have allayed this
cumber!He smiled, too--I saw him smile--when yon paltry provost,
the companion and patron of wretched burghers, defied me, whom this
heartless prince knew to be unable to bear arms.Ere I forget or forgive
it, thou thyself shalt preach up the pardoning of injuries!Think'st thou, Henbane Dwining, that, in very
reality, the Wounds of the slaughtered corpse will gape and shed tears
of fresh blood at the murderer's approach?""I cannot tell, my lord, save by report," said Dwining, "which avouches
the fact.""The brute Bonthron," said Ramorny, "is startled at the apprehension of
such a thing, and speaking of being rather willing to stand the combat."It is the armourer's trade to deal with steel," replied Dwining."Were Bonthron to fall, it would little grieve me," said Ramorny;
"though I should miss an useful hand.""I well believe your lordship will not sorrow as for that you lost in
Curfew Street.Excuse my pleasantry, he, he!But what are the useful
properties of this fellow Bonthron?""Those of a bulldog," answered the knight, "he worries without barking.""You have no fear of his confessing?""Who can tell what the dread of approaching death may do?""He has already shown a timorousness entirely alien from his
ordinary sullenness of nature; he, that would scarce wash his hands
after he had slain a man, is now afraid to see a dead body bleed.""Well," said the leech, "I must do something for him if I can, since it
was to further my revenge that he struck yonder downright blow, though
by ill luck it lighted not where it was intended.""And whose fault was that, timid villain," said Ramorny, "save thine
own, who marked a rascal deer for a buck of the first head?""Benedicite, noble sir," replied the mediciner; "would you have me, who
know little save of chamber practice, be as skilful of woodcraft as
your noble self, or tell hart from hind, doe from roe, in a glade at
midnight?I misdoubted me little when I saw the figure run past us to
the smith's habitation in the wynd, habited like a morrice dancer; and
yet my mind partly misgave me whether it was our man, for methought he
seemed less of stature.But when he came out again, after so much time
as to change his dress, and swaggered onward with buff coat and steel
cap, whistling after the armourer's wonted fashion, I do own I was
mistaken super totam materiem, and loosed your knighthood's bulldog upon
him, who did his devoir most duly, though he pulled down the wrong deer.Therefore, unless the accursed smith kill our poor friend stone dead on
the spot, I am determined, if art may do it, that the ban dog Bonthron
shall not miscarry.""It will put thine art to the test, man of medicine," said Ramorny; "for
know that, having the worst of the combat, if our champion be not killed
stone dead in the lists, he will be drawn forth of them by the heels,
and without further ceremony knitted up to the gallows, as convicted of
the murder; and when he hath swung there like a loose tassel for an
hour or so, I think thou wilt hardly take it in hand to cure his broken
neck.""I am of a different opinion, may it please your knighthood," answered
Dwining, gently."I will carry him off from the very foot of the gallows
into the land of faery, like King Arthur, or Sir Huon of Bordeaux, or
Ugero the Dane; or I will, if I please, suffer him to dangle on the
gibbet for a certain number of minutes, or hours, and then whisk him
away from the sight of all, with as much ease as the wind wafts away the
withered leaf.""This is idle boasting, sir leech," replied Ramorny."The whole mob of
Perth will attend him to the gallows, each more eager than another to
see the retainer of a nobleman die, for the slaughter of a cuckoldly
citizen.There will be a thousand of them round the gibbet's foot.""And were there ten thousand," said Dwining, "shall I, who am a high
clerk, and have studied in Spain, and Araby itself, not be able to
deceive the eyes of this hoggish herd of citizens, when the pettiest
juggler that ever dealt in legerdemain can gull even the sharp
observation of your most intelligent knighthood?I tell you, I will put
the change on them as if I were in possession of Keddie's ring.""If thou speakest truth," answered the knight, "and I think thou darest
not palter with me on such a theme, thou must have the aid of Satan, and
I will have nought to do with him.Dwining indulged in his internal chuckling laugh when he heard his
patron testify his defiance of the foul fiend, and saw him second it by
crossing himself.He composed himself, however, upon observing Ramorny's
aspect become very stern, and said, with tolerable gravity, though a
little interrupted by the effort necessary to suppress his mirthful
mood:

"Confederacy, most devout sir--confederacy is the soul of jugglery.But--he, he, he!--I have not the honour to be--he, he!--an ally of the
gentleman of whom you speak--in whose existence I am--he, he!--no
very profound believer, though your knightship, doubtless, hath better
opportunities of acquaintance.""Proceed, rascal, and without that sneer, which thou mayst otherwise
dearly pay for.""I will, most undaunted," replied Dwining."Know that I have my
confederate too, else my skill were little worth.""And who may that be, pray you?""Stephen Smotherwell, if it like your honour, lockman of this Fair City.I marvel your knighthood knows him not.""And I marvel thy knaveship knows him not on professional acquaintance,"
replied Ramorny; "but I see thy nose is unslit, thy ears yet uncropped,
and if thy shoulders are scarred or branded, thou art wise for using a
high collared jerkin."your honour is pleasant," said the mediciner."It is not by
personal circumstances that I have acquired the intimacy of Stephen
Smotherwell, but on account of a certain traffic betwixt us, in which
an't please you, I exchange certain sums of silver for the bodies,
heads, and limbs of those who die by aid of friend Stephen."exclaimed the knight with horror, "is it to compose charms and
forward works of witchcraft that you trade for these miserable relics of
mortality?"No, an it please your knighthood," answered the mediciner,
much amused with the ignorance of his patron; "but we, who are knights
of the scalpel, are accustomed to practise careful carving of the limbs
of defunct persons, which we call dissection, whereby we discover, by
examination of a dead member, how to deal with one belonging to a living
man, which hath become diseased through injury or otherwise.if your
honour saw my poor laboratory, I could show you heads and hands, feet
and lungs, which have been long supposed to be rotting in the mould.The skull of Wallace, stolen from London Bridge; the head of Sir
Simon Fraser [the famous ancestor of the Lovats, slain at Halidon Hill
(executed in London in 1306)], that never feared man; the lovely skull
of the fair Katie Logie [(should be Margaret Logie), the beautiful
mistress of David II].Oh, had I but had the fortune to have preserved
the chivalrous hand of mine honoured patron!"Thinkest thou to disgust me with thy catalogue of
horrors?How can thy traffic
with the hangdog executioner be of avail to serve me, or to help my
servant Bonthron?""Nay, I do not recommend it to your knighthood, save in an extremity,"
replied Dwining."But we will suppose the battle fought and our cock
beaten.Now we must first possess him with the certainty that, if unable
to gain the day, we will at least save him from the hangman, provided he
confess nothing which can prejudice your knighthood's honour."ay, a thought strikes me," said Ramorny."We can do more than this,
we can place a word in Bonthron's mouth that will be troublesome enough
to him whom I am bound to curse for being the cause of my misfortune.Let us to the ban dog's kennel, and explain to him what is to be done
in every view of the question.If we can persuade him to stand the bier
ordeal, it may be a mere bugbear, and in that case we are safe.If he
take the combat, he is fierce as a baited bear, and may, perchance,
master his opponent; then we are more than safe, we are avenged.If
Bonthron himself is vanquished, we will put thy device in exercise; and
if thou canst manage it cleanly; we may dictate his confession, take the
advantage of it, as I will show thee on further conference, and make a
giant stride towards satisfaction for my wrongs.Suppose our mastiff mortally wounded in the lists, who shall
prevent his growling out some species of confession different from what
we would recommend?""Marry, that can his mediciner," said Dwining."Let me wait on him, and
have the opportunity to lay but a finger on his wound, and trust me he
shall betray no confidence.""Why, there's a willing fiend, that needs neither pushing nor
prompting!""As I trust I shall need neither in your knighthood's service.""We will go indoctrinate our agent," continued the knight."We shall
find him pliant; for, hound as he is, he knows those who feed from those
who browbeat him; and he holds a late royal master of mine in deep hate
for some injurious treatment and base terms which he received at his
hand.I must also farther concert with thee the particulars of
thy practice, for saving the ban dog from the hands of the herd of
citizens."We leave this worthy pair of friends to their secret practices, of which
we shall afterwards see the results.They were, although of different
qualities, as well matched for device and execution of criminal projects
as the greyhound is to destroy the game which the slowhound raises, or
the slowhound to track the prey which the gazehound discovers by the
eye.Pride and selfishness were the characteristics of both; but, from
the difference of rank, education, and talents, they had assumed the
most different appearance in the two individuals.Nothing could less resemble the high blown ambition of the favourite
courtier, the successful gallant, and the bold warrior than the
submissive, unassuming mediciner, who seemed even to court and delight
in insult; whilst, in his secret soul, he felt himself possessed of a
superiority of knowledge, a power both of science and of mind, which
placed the rude nobles of the day infinitely beneath him.So conscious
was Henbane Dwining of this elevation, that, like a keeper of wild
beasts, he sometimes adventured, for his own amusement, to rouse the
stormy passions of such men as Ramorny, trusting, with his humble
manner, to elude the turmoil he had excited, as an Indian boy will
launch his light canoe, secure from its very fragility, upon a broken
surf, in which the boat of an argosy would be assuredly dashed to
pieces.That the feudal baron should despise the humble practitioner
in medicine was a matter of course; but Ramorny felt not the less the
influence which Dwining exercised over him, and was in the encounter
of their wits often mastered by him, as the most eccentric efforts of
a fiery horse are overcome by a boy of twelve years old, if he has been
bred to the arts of the manege.But the contempt of Dwining for Ramorny
was far less qualified.He regarded the knight, in comparison with
himself, as scarcely rising above the brute creation; capable, indeed,
of working destruction, as the bull with his horns or the wolf with his
fangs, but mastered by mean prejudices, and a slave to priest craft, in
which phrase Dwining included religion of every kind.On the whole, he
considered Ramorny as one whom nature had assigned to him as a serf, to
mine for the gold which he worshipped, and the avaricious love of
which was his greatest failing, though by no means his worst vice.He
vindicated this sordid tendency in his own eyes by persuading himself
that it had its source in the love of power."Henbane Dwining," he said, as he gazed in delight upon the hoards which
he had secretly amassed, and which he visited from time to time, "is no
silly miser that doats on those pieces for their golden lustre: it is
the power with which they endow the possessor which makes him thus adore
them.What is there that these put not within your command?Do you love
beauty, and are mean, deformed, infirm, and old?Here is a lure the
fairest hawk of them all will stoop to.Are you feeble, weak, subject
to the oppression of the powerful?Here is that will arm in your defence
those more mighty than the petty tyrant whom you fear.Are you splendid
in your wishes, and desire the outward show of opulence?This dark chest
contains many a wide range of hill and dale, many a fair forest full
of game, the allegiance of a thousand vassals.Wish you for favour in
courts, temporal or spiritual?The smiles of kings, the pardon of popes
and priests for old crimes, and the indulgence which encourages priest
ridden fools to venture on new ones--all these holy incentives to vice
may be purchased for gold.Revenge itself, which the gods are said to
reserve to themselves, doubtless because they envy humanity so sweet a
morsel--revenge itself is to be bought by it.But it is also to be won
by superior skill, and that is the nobler mode of reaching it.I will
spare, then, my treasure for other uses, and accomplish my revenge
gratis; or rather I will add the luxury of augmented wealth to the
triumph of requited wrongs."Thus thought Dwining, as, returned from his visit to Sir John Ramorny,
he added the gold he had received for his various services to the mass
of his treasure; and, having gloated over the whole for a minute or two,
turned the key on his concealed treasure house, and walked forth on his
visits to his patients, yielding the wall to every man whom he met and
bowing and doffing his bonnet to the poorest burgher that owned a petty
booth, nay, to the artificers who gained their precarious bread by the
labour of their welked hands."Caitiffs," was the thought of his heart while he did such
obeisance--"base, sodden witted mechanics!did you know what this
key could disclose, what foul weather from heaven would prevent your
unbonneting?what putrid kennel in your wretched hamlet would be
disgusting enough to make you scruple to fall down and worship the owner
of such wealth?But I will make you feel my power, though it suits my
honour to hide the source of it.I will be an incubus to your city,
since you have rejected me as a magistrate.Like the night mare, I will
hag ride ye, yet remain invisible myself.This miserable Ramorny, too,
he who, in losing his hand, has, like a poor artisan, lost the only
valuable part of his frame, he heaps insulting language on me, as if
anything which he can say had power to chafe a constant mind like mine!Yet, while he calls me rogue, villain, and slave, he acts as wisely as
if he should amuse himself by pulling hairs out of my head while my hand
had hold of his heart strings.Every insult I can pay back instantly
by a pang of bodily pain or mental agony, and--he, he!--I run no long
accounts with his knighthood, that must be allowed."While the mediciner was thus indulging his diabolical musing, and
passing, in his creeping manner, along the street, the cry of females
was heard behind him."Ay, there he is, Our Lady be praised!--there is the most helpful man in
Perth," said one voice."They may speak of knights and kings for redressing wrongs, as they
call it; but give me worthy Master Dwining the potter carrier, cummers,"
replied another.At the same moment, the leech was surrounded and taken hold of by the
speakers, good women of the Fair City.said Dwining, "whose cow has calved?""There is no calving in the case," said one of the women, "but a poor
fatherless wean dying; so come awa' wi' you, for our trust is constant
in you, as Bruce said to Donald of the Isles.""Opiferque per orbem dicor," said Henbane Dwining."What is the child
dying of?""The croup--the croup," screamed one of the gossips; "the innocent is
rouping like a corbie.""Cynanche trachealis--that disease makes brief work.Show me the house
instantly," continued the mediciner, who was in the habit of exercising
his profession liberally, not withstanding his natural avarice, and
humanely, in spite of his natural malignity.As we can suspect him of no
better principle, his motive most probably may have been vanity and the
love of his art.He would nevertheless have declined giving his attendance in the present
case had he known whither the kind gossips were conducting him, in time
sufficient to frame an apology.But, ere he guessed where he was going,
the leech was hurried into the house of the late Oliver Proudfute, from
which he heard the chant of the women as they swathed and dressed the
corpse of the umquhile bonnet maker for the ceremony of next morning, of
which chant the following verses may be received as a modern imitation:

     Viewless essence, thin and bare,
     Well nigh melted into air,
     Still with fondness hovering near
     The earthly form thou once didst wear,

     Pause upon thy pinion's flight;
     Be thy course to left or right,
     Be thou doom'd to soar or sink,
     Pause upon the awful brink.To avenge the deed expelling
     Thee untimely from thy dwelling,
     Mystic force thou shalt retain
     O'er the blood and o'er the brain.When the form thou shalt espy
     That darken'd on thy closing eye,
     When the footstep thou shalt hear
     That thrill'd upon thy dying ear,

     Then strange sympathies shall wake,
     The flesh shall thrill, the nerves shall quake,
     The wounds renew their clotter'd flood,
     And every drop cry blood for blood!Hardened as he was, the physician felt reluctance to pass the threshold
of the man to whose death he had been so directly, though, so far as the
individual was concerned, mistakingly, accessory."Let me pass on, women," he said, "my art can only help the living--the
dead are past our power.""Nay, but your patient is upstairs--the youngest orphan"--Dwining was
compelled to go into the house.But he was surprised when, the instant
he stepped over the threshold, the gossips, who were busied with the
dead body, stinted suddenly in their song, while one said to the others:

"In God's name, who entered?"Not so," said another voice, "it is a drop of the liquid balm.""Nay, cummer, it was blood.Again I say, who entered the house even
now?"One looked out from the apartment into the little entrance, where
Dwining, under pretence of not distinctly seeing the trap ladder by
which he was to ascend into the upper part of this house of lamentation,
was delaying his progress purposely, disconcerted with what had reached
him of the conversation."Nay, it is only worthy Master Henbane Dwining," answered one of the
sibyls."Only Master Dwining," replied the one who had first spoken, in a tone
of acquiescence--"our best helper in need!Then it must have been balm
sure enough.""Nay," said the other, "it may have been blood nevertheless; for
the leech, look you, when the body was found, was commanded by the
magistrates to probe the wound with his instruments, and how could the
poor dead corpse know that that was done with good purpose?""Ay, truly, cummer; and as poor Oliver often mistook friends for enemies
while he was in life, his judgment cannot be thought to have mended
now."Dwining heard no more, being now forced upstairs into a species of
garret, where Magdalen sat on her widowed bed, clasping to her bosom
her infant, which, already black in the face and uttering the gasping,
crowing sound which gives the popular name to the complaint, seemed on
the point of rendering up its brief existence.A Dominican monk sat near
the bed, holding the other child in his arms, and seeming from time to
time to speak a word or two of spiritual consolation, or intermingle
some observation on the child's disorder.The mediciner cast upon the good father a single glance, filled
With that ineffable disdain which men of science entertain against
interlopers.His own aid was instant and efficacious: he snatched the
child from the despairing mother, stripped its throat, and opened
a vein, which, as it bled freely, relieved the little patient
instantaneously.In a brief space every dangerous symptom disappeared,
and Dwining, having bound up the vein, replaced the infant in the arms
of the half distracted mother.The poor woman's distress for her husband's loss, which had been
suspended during the extremity of the child's danger, now returned on
Magdalen with the force of an augmented torrent, which has borne down
the dam dike that for a while interrupted its waves."Oh, learned sir," she said, "you see a poor woman of her that you once
knew a richer.But the hands that restored this bairn to my arms must
not leave this house empty.Generous, kind Master Dwining, accept of
his beads; they are made of ebony and silver.He aye liked to have his
things as handsome as any gentleman, and liker he was in all his ways to
a gentleman than any one of his standing, and even so came of it."With these words, in a mute passion of grief she pressed to her breast
and to her lips the chaplet of her deceased husband, and proceeded to
thrust it into Dwining's hands."Take it," she said, "for the love of one who loved you well.Ah, he
used ever to say, if ever man could be brought back from the brink of
the grave, it must be by Master Dwining's guidance.And his ain bairn
is brought back this blessed day, and he is lying there stark and stiff,
and kens naething of its health and sickness!Oh, woe is me, and walawa!But take the beads, and think on his puir soul, as you put them through
your fingers, he will be freed from purgatory the sooner that good
people pray to assoilzie him.""Take back your beads, cummer; I know no legerdemain, can do no
conjuring tricks," said the mediciner, who, more moved than perhaps his
rugged nature had anticipated, endeavoured to avoid receiving the ill
omened gift.But his last words gave offence to the churchman, whose
presence he had not recollected when he uttered them.said the Dominican, "do you call prayers for the
dead juggling tricks?I know that Chaucer, the English maker, says of
you mediciners, that your study is but little on the Bible.Our mother,
the church, hath nodded of late, but her eyes are now opened to discern
friends from foes; and be well assured--"

"Nay, reverend father," said Dwining, "you take me at too great
advantage.I said I could do no miracles, and was about to add that,
as the church certainly could work such conclusions, those rich beads
should be deposited in your hands, to be applied as they may best
benefit the soul of the deceased."He dropped the beads into the Dominican's hand, and escaped from the
house of mourning."This was a strangely timed visit," he said to himself, when he got safe
out of doors."I hold such things cheap as any can; yet, though it is
but a silly fancy, I am glad I saved the squalling child's life.But
I must to my friend Smotherwell, whom I have no doubt to bring to my
purpose in the matter of Bonthron; and thus on this occasion I shall
save two lives, and have destroyed only one."where he lies embalmed in gore,
     His wound to Heaven cries:
     The floodgates of his blood implore
     For vengeance from the skies.John in Perth, being that of the patron saint
of the burgh, had been selected by the magistrates as that in which
the community was likely to have most fair play for the display of the
ordeal.The churches and convents of the Dominicans, Carthusians, and
others of the regular clergy had been highly endowed by the King and
nobles, and therefore it was the universal cry of the city council
that "their ain good auld St.John," of whose good graces they thought
themselves sure, ought to be fully confided in, and preferred to the new
patrons, for whom the Dominicans, Carthusians, Carmelites, and others
had founded newer seats around the Fair City.The disputes between the
regular and secular clergy added to the jealousy which dictated this
choice of the spot in which Heaven was to display a species of miracle,
upon a direct appeal to the divine decision in a case of doubtful guilt;
and the town clerk was as anxious that the church of St.John should be
preferred as if there had been a faction in the body of saints for and
against the interests of the beautiful town of Perth.Many, therefore, were the petty intrigues entered into and disconcerted
for the purpose of fixing on the church.But the magistrates,
considering it as a matter touching in a close degree the honour of
the city, determined, with judicious confidence in the justice and
impartiality of their patron, to confide the issue to the influence of
St.It was, therefore, after high mass had been performed with the greatest
solemnity of which circumstances rendered the ceremony capable, and
after the most repeated and fervent prayers had been offered to Heaven
by the crowded assembly, that preparations were made for appealing
to the direct judgment of Heaven on the mysterious murder of the
unfortunate bonnet maker.The scene presented that effect of imposing solemnity which the rites
of the Catholic Church are so well qualified to produce.The eastern
window, richly and variously painted, streamed down a torrent of
chequered light upon the high altar.On the bier placed before it were
stretched the mortal remains of the murdered man, his arms folded on his
breast, and his palms joined together, with the fingers pointed upwards,
as if the senseless clay was itself appealing to Heaven for vengeance
against those who had violently divorced the immortal spirit from its
mangled tenement.Close to the bier was placed the throne which supported Robert of
Scotland and his brother Albany.The Prince sat upon a lower stool,
beside his father--an arrangement which occasioned some observation, as,
Albany's seat being little distinguished from that of the King, the heir
apparent, though of full age, seemed to be degraded beneath his uncle in
the sight of the assembled people of Perth.The bier was so placed as to
leave the view of the body it sustained open to the greater part of the
multitude assembled in the church.At the head of the bier stood the Knight of Kinfauns, the challenger,
and at the foot the young Earl of Crawford, as representing the
defendant.The evidence of the Duke of Rothsay in expurgation, as it
was termed, of Sir John Ramorny, had exempted him from the necessity of
attendance as a party subjected to the ordeal; and his illness served as
a reason for his remaining at home.His household, including those who,
though immediately in waiting upon Sir John, were accounted the Prince's
domestics, and had not yet received their dismissal, amounted to eight
or ten persons, most of them esteemed men of profligate habits, and who
might therefore be deemed capable, in the riot of a festival evening,
of committing the slaughter of the bonnet maker.They were drawn up in a
row on the left side of the church, and wore a species of white cassock,
resembling the dress of a penitentiary.All eyes being bent on them,
several of this band seemed so much disconcerted as to excite among the
spectators strong prepossessions of their guilt.The real murderer had
a countenance incapable of betraying him--a sullen, dark look, which
neither the feast nor wine cup could enliven, and which the peril of
discovery and death could not render dejected.We have already noticed the posture of the dead body.The face was bare,
as were the breast and arms.The rest of the corpse was shrouded in a
winding sheet of the finest linen, so that, if blood should flow from
any place which was covered, it could not fail to be instantly manifest.High mass having been performed, followed by a solemn invocation to the
Deity, that He would be pleased to protect the innocent, and make known
the guilty, Eviot, Sir John Ramorny's page, was summoned to undergo the
ordeal.Perhaps he thought his
internal consciousness that Bonthron must have been the assassin might
be sufficient to implicate him in the murder, though he was not directly
accessory to it.He paused before the bier; and his voice faltered,
as he swore by all that was created in seven days and seven nights, by
heaven, by hell, by his part of paradise, and by the God and author
of all, that he was free and sackless of the bloody deed done upon the
corpse before which he stood, and on whose breast he made the sign of
the cross, in evidence of the appeal.The body
remained stiff as before, the curdled wounds gave no sign of blood.The citizens looked on each other with faces of blank disappointment.They had persuaded themselves of Eviot's guilt, and their suspicions had
been confirmed by his irresolute manner.Their surprise at his escape
was therefore extreme.The other followers of Ramorny took heart, and
advanced to take the oath with a boldness which increased as one by
one they performed the ordeal, and were declared, by the voice of
the judges, free and innocent of every suspicion attaching to them on
account of the death of Oliver Proudfute.But there was one individual who did not partake that increasing
confidence.The name of "Bonthron--Bonthron!"sounded three times
through the aisles of the church; but he who owned it acknowledged the
call no otherwise than by a sort of shuffling motion with his feet, as
if he had been suddenly affected with a fit of the palsy."Speak, dog," whispered Eviot, "or prepare for a dog's death!"But the murderer's brain was so much disturbed by the sight before him,
that the judges, beholding his deportment, doubted whether to ordain him
to be dragged before the bier or to pronounce judgment in default; and
it was not until he was asked for the last time whether he would submit
to the ordeal, that he answered, with his usual brevity:

"I will not; what do I know what juggling tricks may be practised to
take a poor man's life?I offer the combat to any man who says I harmed
that dead body."And, according to usual form, he threw his glove upon the floor of the
church.Henry Smith stepped forward, amidst the murmured applauses of his fellow
citizens, which even the august presence could not entirely suppress;
and, lifting the ruffian's glove, which he placed in his bonnet, laid
down his own in the usual form, as a gage of battle."He is no match for me," growled the savage, "nor fit to lift my glove.I follow the Prince of Scotland, in attending on his master of horse."Thou follow me, caitiff!I discharge
thee from my service on the spot.Take him in hand, Smith, and beat
him as thou didst never thump anvil!The villain is both guilty and
recreant.It sickens me even to look at him; and if my royal father will
be ruled by me, he will give the parties two handsome Scottish axes, and
we will see which of them turns out the best fellow before the day is
half an hour older."This was readily assented to by the Earl of Crawford and Sir Patrick
Charteris, the godfathers of the parties, who, as the combatants were
men of inferior rank, agreed that they should fight in steel caps, buff
jackets, and with axes, and that as soon as they could be prepared for
the combat.The lists were appointed in the Skinners' Yards--a neighbouring space of
ground, occupied by the corporation from which it had the name, and
who quickly cleared a space of about thirty feet by twenty-five for
the combatants.Thither thronged the nobles, priests, and commons--all
excepting the old King, who, detesting such scenes of blood, retired
to his residence, and devolved the charge of the field upon the Earl
of Errol, Lord High Constable, to whose office it more particularly
belonged.The Duke of Albany watched the whole proceeding with a close
and wary eye.His nephew gave the scene the heedless degree of notice
which corresponded with his character.When the combatants appeared in the lists, nothing could be more
striking than the contrast betwixt the manly, cheerful countenance of
the smith, whose sparkling bright eye seemed already beaming with the
victory he hoped for, and the sullen, downcast aspect of the brutal
Bonthron, who looked as if he were some obscene bird, driven into
sunshine out of the shelter of its darksome haunts.They made oath
severally, each to the truth of his quarrel--a ceremony which Henry
Gow performed with serene and manly confidence, Bonthron with a dogged
resolution, which induced the Duke of Rothsay to say to the High
Constable: "Didst thou ever, my dear Errol, behold such a mixture of
malignity, cruelty, and I think fear, as in that fellow's countenance?""He is not comely," said the Earl, "but a powerful knave as I have
seen.""I'll gage a hogshead of wine with you, my good lord, that he loses the
day.Henry the armourer is as strong as he, and much more active; and
then look at his bold bearing!There is something in that other fellow
that is loathsome to look upon.Let them yoke presently, my dear
Constable, for I am sick of beholding him."The High Constable then addressed the widow, who, in her deep weeds, and
having her children still beside her, occupied a chair within the lists:
"Woman, do you willingly accept of this man, Henry the Smith, to do
battle as your champion in this cause?""I do--I do, most willingly," answered Magdalen Proudfute; "and may the
blessing of God and St.John give him strength and fortune, since he
strikes for the orphan and fatherless!""Then I pronounce this a fenced field of battle," said the Constable
aloud."Let no one dare, upon peril of his life, to interrupt this
combat by word, speech, or look.The trumpets flourished, and the combatants, advancing from the opposite
ends of the lists, with a steady and even pace, looked at each other
attentively, well skilled in judging from the motion of the eye the
direction in which a blow was meditated.They halted opposite to, and
within reach of, each other, and in turn made more than one feint
to strike, in order to ascertain the activity and vigilance of the
opponent.At length, whether weary of these manoeuvres, or fearing lest
in a contest so conducted his unwieldy strength would be foiled by the
activity of the smith, Bonthron heaved up his axe for a downright blow,
adding the whole strength of his sturdy arms to the weight of the weapon
in its descent.The smith, however, avoided the stroke by stepping
aside; for it was too forcible to be controlled by any guard which he
could have interposed.Ere Bonthron recovered guard, Henry struck him
a sidelong blow on the steel headpiece, which prostrated him on the
ground."Confess, or die," said the victor, placing his foot on the body of
the vanquished, and holding to his throat the point of the axe, which
terminated in a spike or poniard."I will confess," said the villain, glaring wildly upwards on the sky."Not till you have yielded," said Harry Smith."I do yield," again murmured Bonthron, and Henry proclaimed aloud that
his antagonist was defeated.The Dukes of Rothsay and Albany, the High Constable, and the Dominican
prior now entered the lists, and, addressing Bonthron, demanded if he
acknowledged himself vanquished."I do," answered the miscreant."And guilty of the murder of Oliver Proudfute?""I am; but I mistook him for another.""And whom didst thou intend to slay?""Confess, my son,
and merit thy pardon in another world for with this thou hast little
more to do.""I took the slain man," answered the discomfited combatant, "for him
whose hand has struck me down, whose foot now presses me."said the prior; "now all those who doubt the
virtue of the holy ordeal may have their eyes opened to their error.Lo,
he is trapped in the snare which he laid for the guiltless.""I scarce ever saw the man," said the smith."I never did wrong to him
or his.Ask him, an it please your reverence, why he should have thought
of slaying me treacherously.""It is a fitting question," answered the prior."Give glory where it is
due, my son, even though it is manifested by thy shame.For what reason
wouldst thou have waylaid this armourer, who says he never wronged
thee?""He had wronged him whom I served," answered Bonthron, "and I meditated
the deed by his command."Bonthron was silent for an instant, then growled out: "He is too mighty
for me to name.""Hearken, my son," said the churchman; "tarry but a brief hour, and the
mighty and the mean of this earth shall to thee alike be empty sounds.The sledge is even now preparing to drag thee to the place of execution.Therefore, son, once more I charge thee to consult thy soul's weal by
glorifying Heaven, and speaking the truth.Was it thy master, Sir John
Ramorny, that stirred thee to so foul a deed?""No," answered the prostrate villain, "it was a greater than he."And at
the same time he pointed with his finger to the Prince.said the astonished Duke of Rothsay; "do you dare to hint that
I was your instigator?""You yourself, my lord," answered the unblushing ruffian."Die in thy falsehood, accursed slave!"said the Prince; and, drawing
his sword, he would have pierced his calumniator, had not the Lord High
Constable interposed with word and action."Your Grace must forgive my discharging mine office: this caitiff must
be delivered into the hands of the executioner.He is unfit to be dealt
with by any other, much less by your Highness."noble earl," said Albany aloud, and with much real or affected
emotion, "would you let the dog pass alive from hence, to poison the
people's ears with false accusations against the Prince of Scotland?I
say, cut him to mammocks upon the spot!""Your Highness will pardon me," said the Earl of Errol; "I must protect
him till his doom is executed.""Then let him be gagged instantly," said Albany."And you, my royal
nephew, why stand you there fixed in astonishment?Call your resolution
up--speak to the prisoner--swear--protest by all that is sacred that you
knew not of this felon deed.See how the people look on each other and
whisper apart!My life on't that this lie spreads faster than any Gospel
truth.Speak to them, royal kinsman, no matter what you say, so you be
constant in denial.""What, sir," said Rothsay, starting from his pause of surprise and
mortification, and turning haughtily towards his uncle; "would you have
me gage my royal word against that of an abject recreant?Let those who
can believe the son of their sovereign, the descendant of Bruce, capable
of laying ambush for the life of a poor mechanic, enjoy the pleasure of
thinking the villain's tale true.""That will not I for one," said the smith, bluntly."I never did aught
but what was in honour towards his royal Grace the Duke of Rothsay, and
never received unkindness from him in word, look, or deed; and I cannot
think he would have given aim to such base practice.""Was it in honour that you threw his Highness from the ladder in Curfew
Street upon Fastern's [St.said Bonthron; "or think
you the favour was received kindly or unkindly?"This was so boldly said, and seemed so plausible, that it shook the
smith's opinion of the Prince's innocence."Alas, my lord," said he, looking sorrowfully towards Rothsay, "could
your Highness seek an innocent fellow's life for doing his duty by a
helpless maiden?I would rather have died in these lists than live to
hear it said of the Bruce's heir!""Thou art a good fellow, Smith," said the Prince; "but I cannot expect
thee to judge more wisely than others.Away with that convict to the
gallows, and gibbet him alive an you will, that he may speak falsehood
and spread scandal on us to the last prolonged moment of his existence!"So saying, the Prince turned away from the lists, disdaining to notice
the gloomy looks cast towards him, as the crowd made slow and reluctant
way for him to pass, and expressing neither surprise nor displeasure at
a deep, hollow murmur, or groan, which accompanied his retreat.Only a
few of his own immediate followers attended him from the field, though
various persons of distinction had come there in his train.Even the
lower class of citizens ceased to follow the unhappy Prince, whose
former indifferent reputation had exposed him to so many charges of
impropriety and levity, and around whom there seemed now darkening
suspicions of the most atrocious nature.He took his slow and thoughtful way to the church of the Dominicans; but
the ill news, which flies proverbially fast, had reached his father's
place of retirement before he himself appeared.On entering the palace
and inquiring for the King, the Duke of Rothsay was surprised to be
informed that he was in deep consultation with the Duke of Albany, who,
mounting on horseback as the Prince left the lists, had reached the
convent before him.He was about to use the privilege of his rank and
birth to enter the royal apartment, when MacLouis, the commander of
the guard of Brandanes, gave him to understand, in the most respectful
terms, that he had special instructions which forbade his admittance."Go at least, MacLouis, and let them know that I wait their pleasure,"
said the Prince."If my uncle desires to have the credit of shutting the
father's apartment against the son, it will gratify him to know that I
am attending in the outer hall like a lackey.""May it please you," said MacLouis, with hesitation, "if your Highness
would consent to retire just now, and to wait awhile in patience, I will
send to acquaint you when the Duke of Albany goes; and I doubt not that
his Majesty will then admit your Grace to his presence.At present, your
Highness must forgive me, it is impossible you can have access.""I understand you, MacLouis; but go, nevertheless, and obey my
commands."The officer went accordingly, and returned with a message that the King
was indisposed, and on the point of retiring to his private chamber;
but that the Duke of Albany would presently wait upon the Prince of
Scotland.It was, however, a full half hour ere the Duke of Albany appeared--a
period of time which Rothsay spent partly in moody silence, and
partly in idle talk with MacLouis and the Brandanes, as the levity or
irritability of his temper obtained the ascendant.At length the Duke came, and with him the lord High Constable, whose
countenance expressed much sorrow and embarrassment."Fair kinsman," said the Duke of Albany, "I grieve to say that it is
my royal brother's opinion that it will be best, for the honour of the
royal family, that your Royal Highness do restrict yourself for a time
to the seclusion of the High Constable's lodgings, and accept of the
noble Earl here present for your principal, if not sole, companion until
the scandals which have been this day spread abroad shall be refuted or
forgotten.""How is this, my lord of Errol?""Is
your house to be my jail, and is your lordship to be my jailer?""The saints forbid, my lord," said the Earl of Errol "but it is my
unhappy duty to obey the commands of your father, by considering your
Royal Highness for some time as being under my ward.""The Prince--the heir of Scotland, under the ward of the High Constable!is the blighting speech of
a convicted recreant of strength sufficient to tarnish my royal
escutcheon?""While such accusations are not refuted and denied, my kinsman," said
the Duke of Albany, "they will contaminate that of a monarch."exclaimed the Prince; "by whom are they asserted,
save by a wretch too infamous, even by his own confession, to be
credited for a moment, though a beggar's character, not a prince's, were
impeached?Fetch him hither, let the rack be shown to him; you will soon
hear him retract the calumny which he dared to assert!""The gibbet has done its work too surely to leave Bonthron sensible
to the rack," said the Duke of Albany."He has been executed an hour
since."said the Prince; "know you it looks as if
there were practice in it to bring a stain on my name?""The custom is universal, the defeated combatant in the ordeal of battle
is instantly transferred from the lists to the gallows.And yet, fair
kinsman," continued the Duke of Albany, "if you had boldly and strongly
denied the imputation, I would have judged right to keep the wretch
alive for further investigation; but as your Highness was silent, I
deemed it best to stifle the scandal in the breath of him that uttered
it."Mary, my lord, but this is too insulting!Do you, my uncle and
kinsman, suppose me guilty of prompting such an useless and unworthy
action as that which the slave confessed?""It is not for me to bandy question with your Highness, otherwise I
would ask whether you also mean to deny the scarce less unworthy, though
less bloody, attack upon the house in Couvrefew Street?Be not angry
with me, kinsman; but, indeed, your sequestering yourself for some brief
space from the court, were it only during the King's residence in this
city, where so much offence has been given, is imperiously demanded."Rothsay paused when he heard this exhortation, and, looking at the Duke
in a very marked manner, replied:

"Uncle, you are a good huntsman.You have pitched your toils with much
skill, but you would have been foiled, not withstanding, had not the
stag rushed among the nets of free will.God speed you, and may you have
the profit by this matter which your measures deserve.Say to my father,
I obey his arrest.My Lord High Constable, I wait only your pleasure to
attend you to your lodgings.Since I am to lie in ward, I could not have
desired a kinder or more courteous warden."The interview between the uncle and nephew being thus concluded, the
Prince retired with the Earl of Errol to his apartments; the citizens
whom they met in the streets passing to the further side when they
observed the Duke of Rothsay, to escape the necessity of saluting
one whom they had been taught to consider as a ferocious as well as
unprincipled libertine.The Constable's lodgings received the owner and
his princely guest, both glad to leave the streets, yet neither feeling
easy in the situation which they occupied with regard to each other
within doors.We must return to the lists after the combat had ceased, and when the
nobles had withdrawn.The crowds were now separated into two distinct
bodies.That which made the smallest in number was at the same time the
most distinguished for respectability, consisting of the better class
of inhabitants of Perth, who were congratulating the successful champion
and each other upon the triumphant conclusion to which they had brought
their feud with the courtiers.The magistrates were so much elated on
the occasion, that they entreated Sir Patrick Charteris's acceptance of
a collation in the town hall.To this Henry, the hero of the day, was of
course invited, or he was rather commanded to attend.He listened to
the summons with great embarrassment, for it may be readily believed
his heart was with Catharine Glover.But the advice of his father Simon
decided him.That veteran citizen had a natural and becoming deference
for the magistracy of the Fair City; he entertained a high estimation
of all honours which flowed from such a source, and thought that his
intended son in law would do wrong not to receive them with gratitude."Thou must not think to absent thyself from such a solemn occasion, son
Henry," was his advice."Sir Patrick Charteris is to be there himself,
and I think it will be a rare occasion for thee to gain his goodwill.It
is like he may order of thee a new suit of harness; and I myself heard
worthy Bailie Craigdallie say there was a talk of furbishing up the
city's armoury.Thou must not neglect the good trade, now that thou
takest on thee an expensive family.""Tush, father Glover," answered the embarrassed victor, "I lack no
custom; and thou knowest there is Catharine, who may wonder at my
absence, and have her ear abused once more by tales of glee maidens and
I wot not what.""Fear not for that," said the glover, "but go, like an obedient burgess,
where thy betters desire to have thee.I do not deny that it will cost
thee some trouble to make thy peace with Catharine about this duel; for
she thinks herself wiser in such matters than king and council, kirk
and canons, provost and bailies.But I will take up the quarrel with
her myself, and will so work for thee, that, though she may receive
thee tomorrow with somewhat of a chiding, it shall melt into tears and
smiles, like an April morning, that begins with a mild shower.Away with
thee, then, my son, and be constant to the time, tomorrow morning after
mass."The smith, though reluctantly, was obliged to defer to the reasoning of
his proposed father in law, and, once determined to accept the honour
destined for him by the fathers of the city, he extricated himself from
the crowd, and hastened home to put on his best apparel; in which he
presently afterwards repaired to the council house, where the ponderous
oak table seemed to bend under the massy dishes of choice Tay salmon
and delicious sea fish from Dundee, being the dainties which the fasting
season permitted, whilst neither wine, ale, nor metheglin were wanting
to wash them down.The waits, or minstrels of the burgh, played during
the repast, and in the intervals of the music one of them recited With
great emphasis a long poetical account of the battle of Blackearnside,
fought by Sir William Wallace and his redoubted captain and friend,
Thomas of Longueville, against the English general Seward--a theme
perfectly familiar to all the guests, who, nevertheless, more tolerant
than their descendants, listened as if it had all the zest of novelty.It was complimentary to the ancestor of the Knight of Kinfauns,
doubtless, and to other Perthshire families, in passages which the
audience applauded vociferously, whilst they pledged each other in
mighty draughts to the memory of the heroes who had fought by the side
of the Champion of Scotland.The health of Henry Wynd was quaffed
with repeated shouts, and the provost announced publicly, that the
magistrates were consulting how they might best invest him with some
distinguished privilege or honorary reward, to show how highly his
fellow citizens valued his courageous exertions."Nay, take it not thus, an it like your worships," said the smith, with
his usual blunt manner, "lest men say that valour must be rare in Perth
when they reward a man for fighting for the right of a forlorn widow.I am sure there are many scores of stout burghers in the town who would
have done this day's dargue as well or better than I. For, in good
sooth, I ought to have cracked yonder fellow's head piece like an
earthen pipkin--ay, and would have done it, too, if it had not been
one which I myself tempered for Sir John Ramorny.But, an the Fair
City think my service of any worth, I will conceive it far more than
acquitted by any aid which you may afford from the common good to the
support of the widow Magdalen and her poor orphans.""That may well be done," said Sir Patrick Charteris, "and yet leave the
Fair City rich enough to pay her debts to Henry Wynd, of which every man
of us is a better judge than him self, who is blinded with an unavailing
nicety, which men call modesty.And if the burgh be too poor for this,
the provost will bear his share.The Rover's golden angels have not all
taken flight yet."The beakers were now circulated, under the name of a cup of comfort to
the widow, and anon flowed around once more to the happy memory of the
murdered Oliver, now so bravely avenged.In short, it was a feast so
jovial that all agreed nothing was wanting to render it perfect but the
presence of the bonnet maker himself, whose calamity had occasioned the
meeting, and who had usually furnished the standing jest at such festive
assemblies.Had his attendance been possible, it was drily observed by
Bailie Craigdallie, he would certainly have claimed the success of the
day, and vouched himself the avenger of his own murder.At the sound of the vesper bell the company broke up, some of the graver
sort going to evening prayers, where, with half shut eyes and shining
countenances, they made a most orthodox and edifying portion of a Lenten
congregation; others to their own homes, to tell over the occurrences of
the fight and feast, for the information of the family circle; and some,
doubtless, to the licensed freedoms of some tavern, the door of which
Lent did not keep so close shut as the forms of the church required.Henry returned to the wynd, warm with the good wine and the applause of
his fellow citizens, and fell asleep to dream of perfect happiness and
Catharine Glover.We have said that, when the combat was decided, the spectators were
divided into two bodies.Of these, when the more respectable portion
attended the victor in joyous procession, much the greater number, or
what might be termed the rabble, waited upon the subdued and sentenced
Bonthron, who was travelling in a different direction, and for a very
opposite purpose.Whatever may be thought of the comparative attractions
of the house of mourning and of feasting under other circumstances,
there can be little doubt which will draw most visitors, when the
question is, whether we would witness miseries which we are not to
share, or festivities of which we are not to partake.Accordingly, the
tumbril in which the criminal was conveyed to execution was attended by
far the greater proportion of the inhabitants of Perth.A friar was seated in the same car with the murderer, to whom he did
not hesitate to repeat, under the seal of confession, the same false
asseveration which he had made upon the place of combat, which charged
the Duke of Rothsay with being director of the ambuscade by which
the unfortunate bonnet maker had suffered.The same falsehood he
disseminated among the crowd, averring, with unblushing effrontery, to
those who were nighest to the car, that he owed his death to his having
been willing to execute the Duke of Rothsay's pleasure.For a time
he repeated these words, sullenly and doggedly, in the manner of one
reciting a task, or a liar who endeavours by reiteration to obtain
a credit for his words which he is internally sensible they do not
deserve.But when he lifted up his eyes, and beheld in the distance the
black outline of a gallows, at least forty feet high, with its ladder
and its fatal cord, rising against the horizon, he became suddenly
silent, and the friar could observe that he trembled very much."Be comforted, my son," said the good priest, "you have confessed
the truth, and received absolution.Your penitence will be accepted
according to your sincerity; and though you have been a man of bloody
hands and cruel heart, yet, by the church's prayers, you shall be in due
time assoilzied from the penal fires of purgatory."These assurances were calculated rather to augment than to diminish
the terrors of the culprit, who was agitated by doubts whether the
mode suggested for his preservation from death would to a certainty be
effectual, and some suspicion whether there was really any purpose of
employing them in his favour, for he knew his master well enough to be
aware of the indifference with which he would sacrifice one who might on
some future occasion be a dangerous evidence against him.His doom, however, was sealed, and there was no escaping from it.They
slowly approached the fatal tree, which was erected on a bank by the
river's side, about half a mile from the walls of the city--a site
chosen that the body of the wretch, which was to remain food for the
carrion crows, might be seen from a distance in every direction.Here the priest delivered Bonthron to the executioner, by whom he was
assisted up the ladder, and to all appearance despatched according to
the usual forms of the law.He seemed to struggle for life for a
minute, but soon after hung still and inanimate.The executioner, after
remaining upon duty for more than half an hour, as if to permit the
last spark of life to be extinguished, announced to the admirers of such
spectacles that the irons for the permanent suspension of the carcass
not having been got ready, the concluding ceremony of disembowelling the
dead body and attaching it finally to the gibbet would be deferred till
the next morning at sunrise.Notwithstanding the early hour which he had named, Master Smotherwell
had a reasonable attendance of rabble at the place of execution, to
see the final proceedings of justice with its victim.But great was the
astonishment and resentment of these amateurs to find that the dead body
had been removed from the gibbet.They were not, however, long at a loss
to guess the cause of its disappearance.Bonthron had been the follower
of a baron whose estates lay in Fife, and was himself a native of that
province.What was more natural than that some of the Fife men, whose
boats were frequently plying on the river, should have clandestinely
removed the body of their countryman from the place of public shame?The
crowd vented their rage against Smotherwell for not completing his
job on the preceding evening; and had not he and his assistant betaken
themselves to a boat, and escaped across the Tay, they would have run
some risk of being pelted to death.The event, however, was too much in
the spirit of the times to be much wondered at.Its real cause we shall
explain in the following chapter.Let gallows gape for dogs, let men go free.Henry V.


The incidents of a narrative of this kind must be adapted to each other,
as the wards of a key must tally accurately with those of the lock to
which it belongs.The reader, however gentle, will not hold himself
obliged to rest satisfied with the mere fact that such and such
occurrences took place, which is, generally speaking, all that in
ordinary life he can know of what is passing around him; but he is
desirous, while reading for amusement, of knowing the interior movements
occasioning the course of events.This is a legitimate and reasonable
curiosity; for every man hath a right to open and examine the mechanism
of his own watch, put together for his proper use, although he is not
permitted to pry into the interior of the timepiece which, for general
information, is displayed on the town steeple.It would be, therefore, uncourteous to leave my readers under any doubt
concerning the agency which removed the assassin Bonthron from the
gallows--an event which some of the Perth citizens ascribed to the foul
fiend himself, while others were content to lay it upon the natural
dislike of Bonthron's countrymen of Fife to see him hanging on the river
side, as a spectacle dishonourable to their province.About midnight succeeding the day when the execution had taken place,
and while the inhabitants of Perth were deeply buried in slumber, three
men muffled in their cloaks, and bearing a dark lantern, descended the
alleys of a garden which led from the house occupied by Sir John Ramorny
to the banks of the Tay, where a small boat lay moored to a landing
place, or little projecting pier.The wind howled in a low and
melancholy manner through the leafless shrubs and bushes; and a pale
moon "waded," as it is termed in Scotland, amongst drifting clouds,
which seemed to threaten rain.The three individuals entered the boat
with great precaution to escape observation.One of them was a tall,
powerful man; another short and bent downwards; the third middle sized,
and apparently younger than his companions, well made, and active.They seated themselves in the
boat and unmoored it from the pier."We must let her drift with the current till we pass the bridge, where
the burghers still keep guard; and you know the proverb, 'A Perth
arrow hath a perfect flight,'" said the most youthful of the party, who
assumed the office of helmsman, and pushed the boat off from the pier;
whilst the others took the oars, which were muffled, and rowed with all
precaution till they attained the middle of the river; they then ceased
their efforts, lay upon their oars, and trusted to the steersman for
keeping her in mid channel.In this manner they passed unnoticed or disregarded beneath the stately
Gothic arches of the old bridge, erected by the magnificent patronage
of Robert Bruce in 1329, and carried away by an inundation in 1621.Although they heard the voices of a civic watch, which, since these
disturbances commenced, had been nightly maintained in that important
pass, no challenge was given; and when they were so far down the stream
as to be out of hearing of these guardians of the night, they began to
row, but still with precaution, and to converse, though in a low tone."You have found a new trade, comrade, since I left you," said one of the
rowers to the other."I left you engaged in tending a sick knight, and I
find you employed in purloining a dead body from the gallows.""A living body, so please your squirehood, Master Buncle, or else my
craft hath failed of its purpose.""So I am told, Master Pottercarrier; but, saving your clerkship, unless
you tell me your trick, I will take leave to doubt of its success.""A simple toy, Master Buncle, not likely to please a genius so acute as
that of your valiancie.This suspension of the human
body, which the vulgar call hanging, operates death by apoplexia--that
is, the blood being unable to return to the heart by the compression
of the veins, it rushes to the brain, and the man dies.Also, and as an
additional cause of dissolution, the lungs no longer receive the needful
supply of the vital air, owing to the ligature of the cord around the
thorax; and hence the patient perishes."But how is such a revulsion of blood to
the brain to be prevented, sir mediciner?"said the third person, who
was no other than Ramorny's page, Eviot."Marry, then," replied Dwining, "hang me the patient up in such fashion
that the carotid arteries shall not be compressed, and the blood will
not determine to the brain, and apoplexia will not take place; and
again, if there be no ligature around the thorax, the lungs will be
supplied with air, whether the man be hanging in the middle heaven or
standing on the firm earth.""All this I conceive," said Eviot; "but how these precautions can be
reconciled with the execution of the sentence of hanging is what my dull
brain cannot comprehend."good youth, thy valiancie hath spoiled a fair wit.Hadst thou
studied with me, thou shouldst have learned things more difficult than
this.I get me certain bandages, made of the same
substance with your young valiancie's horse girths, having especial care
that they are of a kind which will not shrink on being strained, since
that would spoil my experiment.One loop of this substance is drawn
under each foot, and returns up either side of the leg to a cincture,
with which it is united; these cinctures are connected by divers straps
down the breast and back, in order to divide the weight.And there are
sundry other conveniences for easing the patient, but the chief is this:
the straps, or ligatures, are attached to a broad steel collar, curving
outwards, and having a hook or two, for the better security of the
halter, which the friendly executioner passes around that part of the
machine, instead of applying it to the bare throat of the patient.Thus, when thrown off from the ladder, the sufferer will find himself
suspended, not by his neck, if it please you, but by the steel circle,
which supports the loops in which his feet are placed, and on which his
weight really rests, diminished a little by similar supports under each
arm.Thus, neither vein nor windpipe being compressed, the man will
breathe as free, and his blood, saving from fright and novelty of
situation, will flow as temperately as your valiancie's when you stand
up in your stirrups to view a field of battle.""By my faith, a quaint and rare device!"pursued the leech, "and well worth being known to such
mounting spirits as your valiancies, since there is no knowing to what
height Sir John Ramorny's pupils may arrive; and if these be such that
it is necessary to descend from them by a rope, you may find my mode of
management more convenient than the common practice.Marry, but you must
be provided with a high collared doublet, to conceal the ring of steel,
and, above all, such a bonus socius as Smother well to adjust the
noose.""Base poison vender," said Eviot, "men of our calling die on the field
of battle.""I will save the lesson, however," replied Buncle, "in case of some
pinching occasion.But what a night the bloody hangdog Bonthron must
have had of it, dancing a pavise in mid air to the music of his own
shackles, as the night wind swings him that way and this!""It were an alms deed to leave him there," said Eviot; "for his descent
from the gibbet will but encourage him to new murders.He knows but two
elements--drunkenness and bloodshed.""Perhaps Sir John Ramorny might have been of your opinion," said
Dwining; "but it would first have been necessary to cut out the rogue's
tongue, lest he had told strange tales from his airy height.And there
are other reasons that it concerns not your valiancies to know.In
truth, I myself have been generous in serving him, for the fellow is
built as strong as Edinburgh Castle, and his anatomy would have matched
any that is in the chirurgical hall of Padua.But tell me, Master
Buncle, what news bring you from the doughty Douglas?""They may tell that know," said Buncle."I am the dull ass that bears
the message, and kens nought of its purport.I carried letters from the Duke of Albany and from Sir John
Ramorny to the Douglas, and he looked black as a northern tempest when
he opened them.I brought them answers from the Earl, at which they
smiled like the sun when the harvest storm is closing over him.Go to
your ephemerides, leech, and conjure the meaning out of that.""Methinks I can do so without much cost of wit," said the chirurgeon;
"but yonder I see in the pale moonlight our dead alive.Should he have
screamed out to any chance passenger, it were a curious interruption
to a night journey to be hailed from the top of such a gallows as that.Hark, methinks I do hear his groans amid the whistling of the wind and
the creaking of the chains.So--fair and softly; make fast the boat
with the grappling, and get out the casket with my matters, we would be
better for a little fire, but the light might bring observation on
us.Come on, my men of valour, march warily, for we are bound for the
gallows foot.Follow with the lantern; I trust the ladder has been left."Sing, three merry men, and three merry men,
     And three merry men are we,
     Thou on the land, and I on the sand,
     And Jack on the gallows tree."As they advanced to the gibbet, they could plainly hear groans, though
uttered in a low tone.Dwining ventured to give a low cough once or
twice, by way of signal; but receiving no answer, "We had best make
haste," said he to his companions, "for our friend must be in extremis,
as he gives no answer to the signal which announces the arrival of help.I will go up the ladder first and cut the
rope.Do you two follow, one after another, and take fast hold of the
body, so that he fall not when the halter is unloosed.Keep sure gripe,
for which the bandages will afford you convenience.Bethink you that,
though he plays an owl's part tonight, he hath no wings, and to fall out
of a halter may be as dangerous as to fall into one."While he spoke thus with sneer and gibe, he ascended the ladder, and
having ascertained that the men at arms who followed him had the body in
their hold, he cut the rope, and then gave his aid to support the almost
lifeless form of the criminal.By a skilful exertion of strength and address, the body of Bonthron was
placed safely on the ground; and the faint yet certain existence of life
having been ascertained, it was thence transported to the river side,
where, shrouded by the bank, the party might be best concealed from
observation, while the leech employed himself in the necessary means of
recalling animation, with which he had taken care to provide himself.For this purpose he first freed the recovered person from his shackles,
which the executioner had left unlocked on purpose, and at the same time
disengaged the complicated envelopes and bandages by which he had been
suspended.It was some time ere Dwining's efforts succeeded; for, in
despite of the skill with which his machine had been constructed, the
straps designed to support the body had stretched so considerably as to
occasion the sense of suffocation becoming extremely overpowering.But
the address of the surgeon triumphed over all obstacles; and, after
sneezing and stretching himself, with one or two brief convulsions,
Bonthron gave decided proofs of reanimation, by arresting the hand
of the operator as it was in the act of dropping strong waters on his
breast and throat, and, directing the bottle which contained them to his
lips, he took, almost perforce, a considerable gulp of the contents."It is spiritual essence double distilled," said the astonished
operator, "and would blister the throat and burn the stomach of any
other man.But this extraordinary beast is so unlike all other human
creatures, that I should not wonder if it brought him to the complete
possession of his faculties."Bonthron seemed to confirm this: he started with a strong convulsion,
sat up, stared around, and indicated some consciousness of existence."Wine--wine," were the first words which he articulated.The leech gave him a draught of medicated wine, mixed with water.He
rejected it, under the dishonourable epithet of "kennel washings," and
again uttered the words, "Wine--wine.""Nay, take it to thee, i' the devil's name," said the leech, "since none
but he can judge of thy constitution."A draught, long and deep enough to have discomposed the intellects of
any other person, was found effectual in recalling those of Bonthron to
a more perfect state; though he betrayed no recollection of where he was
or what had befallen him, and in his brief and sullen manner asked why
he was brought to the river side at this time of night."Another frolic of the wild Prince, for drenching me as he did before.Nails and blood, but I would--"

"Hold thy peace," interrupted Eviot, "and be thankful, I pray you, if
you have any thankfulness in you, that thy body is not crow's meat and
thy soul in a place where water is too scarce to duck thee.""I begin to bethink me," said the ruffian; and raising the flask to his
mouth, which he saluted with a long and hearty kiss, he set the empty
bottle on the earth, dropped his head on his bosom, and seemed to muse
for the purpose of arranging his confused recollections."We can abide the issue of his meditations no longer," said Dwining; "he
will be better after he has slept.you have been riding the air
these some hours; try if the water be not an easier mode of conveyance.I can no more lift this mass than I
could raise in my arms a slaughtered bull.""Stand upright on thine own feet, Bonthron, now we have placed thee upon
them," said Eviot."Every drop of blood tingles in my
veins as if it had pinpoints, and my knees refuse to bear their burden.This is some practice of thine,
thou dog leech!""Ay--ay, so it is, honest Bonthron," said Dwining--"a practice thou
shalt thank me for when thou comest to learn it.In the mean while,
stretch down in the stern of that boat, and let me wrap this cloak about
thee."Assisted into the boat accordingly, Bonthron was deposited there as
conveniently as things admitted of.He answered their attentions with
one or two snorts resembling the grunt of a boar who has got some food
particularly agreeable to him."And now, Buncle," said the chirurgeon, "your valiant squireship
knows your charge.You are to carry this lively cargo by the river to
Newburgh, where you are to dispose of him as you wot of; meantime,
here are his shackles and bandages, the marks of his confinement and
liberation.Bind them up together, and fling them into the deepest pool
you pass over; for, found in your possession, they might tell tales
against us all.This low, light breath of wind from the west will permit
you to use a sail as soon as the light comes in and you are tired of
rowing.Your other valiancie, Master Page Eviot, must be content to
return to Perth with me afoot, for here severs our fair company.Take
with thee the lantern, Buncle, for thou wilt require it more than we,
and see thou send me back my flasket."As the pedestrians returned to Perth, Eviot expressed his belief that
Bonthron's understanding would never recover the shock which terror had
inflicted upon it, and which appeared to him to have disturbed all the
faculties of his mind, and in particular his memory."It is not so, an it please your pagehood," said the leech."Bonthron's
intellect, such as it is, hath a solid character: it Will but vacillate
to and fro like a pendulum which hath been put in motion, and then will
rest in its proper point of gravity.Our memory is, of all our powers of
mind, that which is peculiarly liable to be suspended.Deep intoxication
or sound sleep alike destroy it, and yet it returns when the drunkard
becomes sober or the sleeper is awakened.I knew at Paris a criminal condemned to die by the halter,
who suffered the sentence accordingly, showing no particular degree of
timidity upon the scaffold, and behaving and expressing himself as men
in the same condition are wont to do.Accident did for him what a little
ingenious practice hath done for our amiable friend from whom we but
now parted.He was cut down and given to his friends before life was
extinct, and I had the good fortune to restore him.But, though he
recovered in other particulars, he remembered but little of his trial
and sentence.Of his confession on the morning of his execution--he!(in his usual chuckling manner)--he remembered him not a word.Neither of leaving the prison, nor of his passage to the Greve, where
he suffered, nor of the devout speeches with which he--he!he!--so many good Christians, nor of ascending the
fatal tree, nor of taking the fatal leap, had my revenant the slightest
recollection.'But here we reach the point where we must separate;
for it were unfit, should we meet any of the watch, that we be found
together, and it were also prudent that we enter the city by different
gates.My profession forms an excuse for my going and coming at all
times.Your valiant pagehood will make such explanation as may seem
sufficing.""I shall make my will a sufficient excuse if I am interrogated," said
the haughty young man."Yet I will avoid interruption, if possible.The
moon is quite obscured, and the road as black as a wolf's mouth.""Tut," said the physicianer, "let not your valour care for that: we
shall tread darker paths ere it be long."Without inquiring into the meaning of these evil boding sentences, and
indeed hardly listening to them in the pride and recklessness of his
nature, the page of Ramorny parted from his ingenious and dangerous
companion, and each took his own way.The course of true love never did run smooth.The ominous anxiety of our armourer had not played him false.When the
good glover parted with his intended son in law, after the judicial
combat had been decided, he found what he indeed had expected, that his
fair daughter was in no favourable disposition towards her lover.But
although he perceived that Catharine was cold, restrained, collected,
had cast away the appearance of mortal passion, and listened with a
reserve, implying contempt, to the most splendid description he could
give her of the combat in the Skinners' Yards, he was determined not
to take the least notice of her altered manner, but to speak of her
marriage with his son Henry as a thing which must of course take place.At length, when she began, as on a former occasion, to intimate that her
attachment to the armourer did not exceed the bounds of friendship, that
she was resolved never to marry, that the pretended judicial combat
was a mockery of the divine will, and of human laws, the glover not
unnaturally grew angry."I cannot read thy thoughts, wench; nor can I pretend to guess under
what wicked delusion it is that you kiss a declared lover, suffer him
to kiss you, run to his house when a report is spread of his death, and
fling yourself into his arms when you find him alone [alive].All
this shows very well in a girl prepared to obey her parents in a match
sanctioned by her father; but such tokens of intimacy, bestowed on one
whom a young woman cannot esteem, and is determined not to marry, are
uncomely and unmaidenly.You have already been more bounteous of your
favours to Henry Smith than your mother, whom God assoilzie, ever was to
me before I married her.I tell thee, Catharine, this trifling with the
love of an honest man is what I neither can, will, nor ought to endure.I have given my consent to the match, and I insist it shall take place
without delay, and that you receive Henry Wynd tomorrow, as a man whose
bride you are to be with all despatch.""A power more potent than yours, father, will say no," replied
Catharine."I will risk it; my power is a lawful one, that of a father over a
child, and an erring child," answered her father."God and man allow of
my influence.""Then, may Heaven help us," said Catharine; "for, if you are obstinate
in your purpose, we are all lost.""We can expect no help from Heaven," said the glover, "when we act
with indiscretion.I am clerk enough myself to know that; and that your
causeless resistance to my will is sinful, every priest will inform
you.Ay, and more than that, you have spoken degradingly of the blessed
appeal to God in the combat of ordeal.for the Holy Church
is awakened to watch her sheepfold, and to extirpate heresy by fire and
steel; so much I warn thee of."Catharine uttered a suppressed exclamation; and, with difficulty
compelling herself to assume an appearance of composure, promised her
father that, if he would spare her any farther discussion of the subject
till tomorrow morning, she would then meet him, determined to make a
full discovery of her sentiments.With this promise Simon Glover was obliged to remain contented, though
extremely anxious for the postponed explanation.It could not be levity
or fickleness of character which induced his daughter to act with so
much apparent inconsistency towards the man of his choice, and whom she
had so lately unequivocally owned to be also the man of her own.What
external force there could exist, of a kind powerful enough to change
the resolutions she had so decidedly expressed within twenty-four hours,
was a matter of complete mystery."But I will be as obstinate as she can be," thought the glover, "and she
shall either marry Henry Smith without farther delay or old Simon Glover
will know an excellent reason to the contrary."The subject was not renewed during the evening; but early on the next
morning, just at sun rising, Catharine knelt before the bed in which her
parent still slumbered.Her heart sobbed as if it would burst, and her
tears fell thick upon her father's face.The good old man awoke, looked
up, crossed his child's forehead, and kissed her affectionately."I understand thee, Kate," he said; "thou art come to confession, and, I
trust, art desirous to escape a heavy penance by being sincere.""I need not ask, my father, if you remember the Carthusian monk,
Clement, and his preachings and lessons; at which indeed you assisted so
often, that you cannot be ignorant men called you one of his converts,
and with greater justice termed me so likewise?""I am aware of both," said the old man, raising himself on his elbow;
"but I defy foul fame to show that I ever owned him in any heretical
proposition, though I loved to hear him talk of the corruptions of the
church, the misgovernment of the nobles, and the wild ignorance of
the poor, proving, as it seemed to me, that the sole virtue of our
commonweal, its strength and its estimation, lay among the burgher
craft of the better class, which I received as comfortable doctrine, and
creditable to the town.And if he preached other than right doctrine,
wherefore did his superiors in the Carthusian convent permit it?If the
shepherds turn a wolf in sheep's clothing into the flock, they should
not blame the sheep for being worried.""They endured his preaching, nay, they encouraged it," said Catharine,
"while the vices of the laity, the contentions of the nobles, and
the oppression of the poor were the subject of his censure, and they
rejoiced in the crowds who, attracted to the Carthusian church,
forsook those of the other convents.But the hypocrites--for such they
are--joined with the other fraternities in accusing their preacher
Clement, when, passing from censuring the crimes of the state, he
began to display the pride, ignorance, and luxury of the churchmen
themselves--their thirst of power, their usurpation over men's
consciences, and their desire to augment their worldly wealth.""For God's sake, Catharine," said her father, "speak within doors: your
voice rises in tone and your speech in bitterness, your eyes sparkle.It is owing to this zeal in what concerns you no more than others
that malicious persons fix upon you the odious and dangerous name of a
heretic.""You know I speak no more than what is truth," said Catharine, "and
which you yourself have avouched often.""Wouldst
thou have me avouch what might cost me life and limb, land and goods?For a full commission hath been granted for taking and trying heretics,
upon whom is laid the cause of all late tumults and miscarriages;
wherefore, few words are best, wench.I am ever of mind with the old
maker:

"Since word is thrall and thought is free, Keep well thy tongue, I
counsel thee.""The counsel comes too late, father," answered Catharine, sinking down
on a chair by her father's bedside."The words have been spoken and
heard; and it is indited against Simon Glover, burgess in Perth, that he
hath spoken irreverent discourses of the doctrines of Holy Church.""As I live by knife and needle," interrupted Simon, "it is a lie!I
never was so silly as to speak of what I understood not.""And hath slandered the anointed of the church, both regular and
secular," continued Catharine."Nay, I will never deny the truth," said the glover: "an idle word I may
have spoken at the ale bench, or over a pottle pot of wine, or in right
sure company; but else, my tongue is not one to run my head into peril.""So you think, my dearest father; but your slightest language has been
espied, your best meaning phrases have been perverted, and you are in
dittay as a gross railer against church and churchmen, and for holding
discourse against them with loose and profligate persons, such as the
deceased Oliver Proudfute, the smith Henry of the Wynd, and others, set
forth as commending the doctrines of Father Clement, whom they charge
with seven rank heresies, and seek for with staff and spear, to try him
to the death.But that," said Catharine, kneeling, and looking upwards
with the aspect of one of those beauteous saints whom the Catholics have
given to the fine arts--"that they shall never do.He hath escaped from
the net of the fowler; and, I thank Heaven, it was by my means.""Thy means, girl--art thou mad?""I will not deny what I glory in," answered Catharine: "it was by my
means that Conachar was led to come hither with a party of men and carry
off the old man, who is now far beyond the Highland line.""Thou my rash--my unlucky child!"said the glover, "hast dared to aid
the escape of one accused of heresy, and to invite Highlanders in arms
to interfere with the administration of justice within burgh?thou hast offended both against the laws of the church and those of the
realm.What--what would become of us, were this known?""It is known, my dear father," said the maiden, firmly--"known even to
those who will be the most willing avengers of the deed.""This must be some idle notion, Catharine, or some trick of those
cogging priests and nuns; it accords not with thy late cheerful
willingness to wed Henry Smith."dearest father, remember the dismal surprise occasioned by his
reported death, and the joyful amazement at finding him alive; and deem
it not wonder if I permitted myself, under your protection, to say more
than my reflection justified.But then I knew not the worst, and thought
the danger exaggerated.Alas I was yesterday fearfully undeceived, when
the abbess herself came hither, and with her the Dominican.They showed
me the commission, under the broad seal of Scotland, for inquiring into
and punishing heresy; they showed me your name and my own in a list of
suspected persons; and it was with tears--real tears, that the abbess
conjured me to avert a dreadful fate by a speedy retreat into the
cloister, and that the monk pledged his word that you should not be
molested if I complied.""The foul fiend take them both for weeping crocodiles!"replied Catharine, "complaint or anger will little help us; but
you see I have had real cause for this present alarm."my reckless child, where was your
prudence when you ran headlong into such a snare?""Hear me, father," said Catharine; "there is still one mode of safety
held out: it is one which I have often proposed, and for which I have in
vain supplicated your permission.""I understand you--the convent," said her father."But, Catharine, what
abbess or prioress would dare--"

"That I will explain to you, father, and it will also show the
circumstances which have made me seem unsteady of resolution to a
degree which has brought censure upon me from yourself and others.Our
confessor, old Father Francis, whom I chose from the Dominican convent
at your command--"

"Ay, truly," interrupted the glover; "and I so counselled and commanded
thee, in order to take off the report that thy conscience was altogether
under the direction of Father Clement.""Well, this Father Francis has at different times urged and provoked me
to converse on such matters as he judged I was likely to learn something
of from the Carthusian preacher.I fell
into the snare, spoke freely, and, as he argued gently, as one who would
fain be convinced, I even spoke warmly in defence of what I believed
devoutly.The confessor assumed not his real aspect and betrayed not his
secret purpose until he had learned all that I had to tell him.It was
then that he threatened me with temporal punishment and with eternal
condemnation.Had his threats reached me alone, I could have stood firm;
for their cruelty on earth I could have endured, and their power beyond
this life I have no belief in."said the glover, who was well nigh beside himself
at perceiving at every new word the increasing extremity of his
daughter's danger, "beware of blaspheming the Holy Church, whose arms
are as prompt to strike as her ears are sharp to hear.""To me," said the Maid of Perth, again looking up, "the terrors of the
threatened denunciations would have been of little avail; but when they
spoke of involving thee, my father, in the charge against me, I own
I trembled, and desired to compromise.The Abbess Martha, of Elcho
nunnery, being my mother's kinswoman, I told her my distresses, and
obtained her promise that she would receive me, if, renouncing worldly
love and thoughts of wedlock, I would take the veil in her sisterhood.She had conversation on the topic, I doubt not, with the Dominican
Francis, and both joined in singing the same song."'Remain in the world,' said they, 'and thy father and thou shall be
brought to trial as heretics; assume the veil, and the errors of both
shall be forgiven and cancelled.'They spoke not even of recantation
of errors of doctrine: all should be peace if I would but enter the
convent.""I doubt not--I doubt not," said Simon: "the old glover is thought rich,
and his wealth would follow his daughter to the convent of Elcho, unless
what the Dominicans might claim as their own share.So this was thy call
to the veil, these thy objections to Henry Wynd?""Indeed, father, the course was urged on all hands, nor did my own
mind recoil from it.Sir John Ramorny threatened me with the powerful
vengeance of the young Prince, if I continued to repel his wicked suit;
and as for poor Henry, it is but of late that I have discovered, to
my own surprise--that--that I love his virtues more than I dislike his
faults.the discovery has only been made to render my quitting the
world more difficult than when I thought I had thee only to regret."She rested her head on her hand and wept bitterly."All this is folly," said the glover."Never was there an extremity so
pinching, but what a wise man might find counsel if he was daring enough
to act upon it.This has never been the land or the people over whom
priests could rule in the name of Rome, without their usurpation being
controlled.If they are to punish each honest burgher who says the
monks love gold, and that the lives of some of them cry shame upon the
doctrines they teach, why, truly, Stephen Smotherwell will not lack
employment; and if all foolish maidens are to be secluded from the world
because they follow the erring doctrines of a popular preaching friar,
they must enlarge the nunneries and receive their inmates on slighter
composition.Our privileges have been often defended against the Pope
himself by our good monarchs of yore, and when he pretended to interfere
with the temporal government of the kingdom, there wanted not a Scottish
Parliament who told him his duty in a letter that should have been
written in letters of gold.I have seen the epistle myself, and though
I could not read it, the very sight of the seals of the right reverend
prelates and noble and true barons which hung at it made my heart leap
for joy.Thou shouldst not have kept this secret, my child--but it is no
time to tax thee with thy fault.I will mount
instantly, and go to our Lord Provost and have his advice, and, as I
trust, his protection and that of other true hearted Scottish nobles,
who will not see a true man trodden down for an idle word."my father," said Catharine, "it was even this impetuosity which I
dreaded.I knew if I made my plaint to you there would soon be fire and
feud, as if religion, though sent to us by the Father of peace, were fit
only to be the mother of discord; and hence I could now--even now--give
up the world, and retire with my sorrow among the sisters of Elcho,
would you but let me be the sacrifice.Only, father--comfort poor Henry
when we are parted for ever; and do not--do not let him think of me too
harshly.Say Catharine will never vex him more by her remonstrances, but
that she will never forget him in her prayers.""The girl hath a tongue that would make a Saracen weep," said her
father, his own eyes sympathising with those of his daughter."But I
will not yield way to this combination between the nun and the priest to
rob me of my only child.Away with you, girl, and let me don my clothes;
and prepare yourself to obey me in what I may have to recommend for your
safety.Get a few clothes together, and what valuables thou hast; also,
take the keys of my iron box, which poor Henry Smith gave me, and divide
what gold you find into two portions; put the one into a purse for
thyself, and the other into the quilted girdle which I made on purpose
to wear on journeys.Thus both shall be provided, in case fate should
sunder us; in which event, God send the whirlwind may take the withered
leaf and spare the green one!Let them make ready my horse instantly,
and the white jennet that I bought for thee but a day since, hoping to
see thee ride to St.John's Kirk with maids and matrons, as blythe a
bride as ever crossed the holy threshold.Away, and remember that the saints help those who are willing to help
themselves.Not a word in answer; begone, I say--no wilfullness now.The
pilot in calm weather will let a sea boy trifle with the rudder; but, by
my soul, when winds howl and waves arise, he stands by the helm himself.Catharine left the room to execute, as well as she might, the commands
of her father, who, gentle in disposition and devotedly attached to his
child, suffered her often, as it seemed, to guide and rule both herself
and him; yet who, as she knew, was wont to claim filial obedience and
exercise parental authority with sufficient strictness when the occasion
seemed to require an enforcement of domestic discipline.While the fair Catharine was engaged in executing her father's behests,
and the good old glover was hastily attiring himself, as one who was
about to take a journey, a horse's tramp was heard in the narrow street.The horseman was wrapped in his riding cloak, having the cape of it
drawn up, as if to hide the under part of his face, while his bonnet was
pulled over his brows, and a broad plume obscured his upper features.He sprung from the saddle, and Dorothy had scarce time to reply to
his inquiries that the glover was in his bedroom, ere the stranger had
ascended the stair and entered the sleeping apartment.Simon, astonished
and alarmed, and disposed to see in this early visitant an apparitor or
sumner come to attach him and his daughter, was much relieved when, as
the stranger doffed the bonnet and threw the skirt of the mantle from
his face, he recognised the knightly provost of the Fair City, a visit
from whom at any time was a favour of no ordinary degree, but, being
made at such an hour, had something marvellous, and, connected with the
circumstances of the times, even alarming."This high honour done to your
poor beadsman--"

"Hush!"said the knight, "there is no time for idle civilities.I came
hither because a man is, in trying occasions, his own safest page, and
I can remain no longer than to bid thee fly, good glover, since warrants
are to be granted this day in council for the arrest of thy daughter and
thee, under charge of heresy; and delay will cost you both your liberty
for certain, and perhaps your lives.""I have heard something of such a matter," said the glover, "and was
this instant setting forth to Kinfauns to plead my innocence of this
scandalous charge, to ask your lordship's counsel, and to implore your
protection.""Thy innocence, friend Simon, will avail thee but little before
prejudiced judges; my advice is, in one word, to fly, and wait for
happier times.As for my protection, we must tarry till the tide turns
ere it will in any sort avail thee.But if thou canst lie concealed for
a few days or weeks, I have little doubt that the churchmen, who, by
siding with the Duke of Albany in court intrigue, and by alleging
the decay of the purity of Catholic doctrine as the sole cause of the
present national misfortunes, have, at least for the present hour, an
irresistible authority over the King, will receive a check.In the mean
while, however, know that King Robert hath not only given way to this
general warrant for inquisition after heresy, but hath confirmed the
Pope's nomination of Henry Wardlaw to be Archbishop of St.Andrews and
Primate of Scotland; thus yielding to Rome those freedoms and immunities
of the Scottish Church which his ancestors, from the time of Malcolm
Canmore, have so boldly defended.His brave fathers would have rather
subscribed a covenant with the devil than yielded in such a matter to
the pretensions of Rome.""None, old man, save in some sudden court change," said Sir Patrick."The King is but like a mirror, which, having no light itself, reflects
back with equal readiness any which is placed near to it for the
time.Now, although the Douglas is banded with Albany, yet the Earl is
unfavourable to the high claims of those domineering priests, having
quarrelled with them about the exactions which his retinue hath raised
on the Abbot of Arbroath.He will come back again with a high hand, for
report says the Earl of March hath fled before him.When he returns
we shall have a changed world, for his presence will control Albany;
especially as many nobles, and I myself, as I tell you in confidence,
are resolved to league with him to defend the general right.Thy exile,
therefore, will end with his return to our court.Thou hast but to seek
thee some temporary hiding place.""For that, my lord," said the glover, "I can be at no loss, since I
have just title to the protection of the high Highland chief, Gilchrist
MacIan, chief of the Clan Quhele.""Nay, if thou canst take hold of his mantle thou needs no help of any
one else: neither Lowland churchman nor layman finds a free course of
justice beyond the Highland frontier.""But then my child, noble sir--my Catharine?"The graddan cake will keep her white teeth
in order, the goat's whey will make the blood spring to her cheek again,
which these alarms have banished and even the Fair Maiden of Perth may
sleep soft enough on a bed of Highland breckan.""It is not from such idle respects, my lord, that I hesitate," said the
glover."Catharine is the daughter of a plain burgher, and knows not
nicety of food or lodging.But the son of MacIan hath been for many
years a guest in my house, and I am obliged to say that I have observed
him looking at my daughter, who is as good as a betrothed bride, in a
manner that, though I cared not for it in this lodging in Curfew Street,
would give me some fear of consequences in a Highland glen, where I have
no friend and Conachar many."The knightly provost replied by a long whistle.Nay, in
that case, I advise thee to send her to the nunnery at Elcho, where the
abbess, if I forget not, is some relation of yours.Indeed, she said so
herself, adding, that she loved her kinswoman well, together with all
that belongs to thee, Simon.""Truly, my lord, I do believe that the abbess hath so much regard for
me, that she would willingly receive the trust of my daughter, and
my whole goods and gear, into her sisterhood.Marry, her affection is
something of a tenacious character, and would be loth to unloose its
hold, either upon the wench or her tocher."again whistled the Knight of Kinfauns; "by the Thane's
Cross, man, but this is an ill favoured pirn to wind: Yet it shall never
be said the fairest maid in the Fair City was cooped up in a convent,
like a kain hen in a cavey, and she about to be married to the bold
burgess Henry Wynd.That tale shall not be told while I wear belt and
spurs, and am called Provost of Perth.""We must all take our share of the risk.Come, get you and your daughter
presently to horse.You shall ride with me, and we'll see who dare
gloom at you.The summons is not yet served on thee, and if they send
an apparitor to Kinfauns without a warrant under the King's own hand,
I make mine avow, by the Red Rover's soul!that he shall eat his
writ, both wax and wether skin.and," addressing
Catharine, as she entered at the moment, "you too, my pretty maid--

"To horse, and fear not for your quarters; They thrive in law that trust
in Charters."In a minute or two the father and daughter were on horseback, both
keeping an arrow's flight before the provost, by his direction, that
they might not seem to be of the same company.They passed the eastern
gate in some haste, and rode forward roundly until they were out of
sight.Sir Patrick followed leisurely; but, when he was lost to the view
of the warders, he spurred his mettled horse, and soon came up with the
glover and Catharine, when a conversation ensued which throws light upon
some previous passages of this history.seed of those who scorn'd
     To stoop the neck to wide imperial Rome--
     Oh, dearest half of Albion sea walled!"I have been devising a mode," said the well meaning provost, "by which
I may make you both secure for a week or two from the malice of your
enemies, when I have little doubt I may see a changed world at court.But that I may the better judge what is to be done, tell me frankly,
Simon, the nature of your connexion with Gilchrist MacIan, which leads
you to repose such implicit confidence in him.You are a close observer
of the rules of the city, and are aware of the severe penalties which
they denounce against such burghers as have covine and alliance with the
Highland clans.""True, my lord; but it is also known to you that our craft, working in
skins of cattle, stags, and every other description of hides, have a
privilege, and are allowed to transact with those Highlanders, as with
the men who can most readily supply us with the means of conducting our
trade, to the great profit of the burgh.Thus it hath chanced with me to
have great dealings with these men; and I can take it on my salvation,
that you nowhere find more just and honourable traffickers, or by whom a
man may more easily make an honest penny.I have made in my day several
distant journeys into the far Highlands, upon the faith of their chiefs;
nor did I ever meet with a people more true to their word, when you
can once prevail upon them to plight it in your behalf.And as for the
Highland chief, Gilchrist MacIan, saving that he is hasty in homicide
and fire raising towards those with whom he hath deadly feud, I have
nowhere seen a man who walketh a more just and upright path.""It is more than ever I heard before," said Sir Patrick Charteris."Yet
I have known something of the Highland runagates too.""They show another favour, and a very different one, to their friends
than to their enemies, as your lordship shall understand," said the
glover."However, be that as it may, it chanced me to serve Gilchrist
MacIan in a high matter.It is now about eighteen years since, that it
chanced, the Clan Quhele and Clan Chattan being at feud, as indeed they
are seldom at peace, the former sustained such a defeat as well nigh
extirpated the family of their chief MacIan.Seven of his sons were
slain in battle and after it, himself put to flight, and his castle
taken and given to the flames.His wife, then near the time of giving
birth to an infant, fled into the forest, attended by one faithful
servant and his daughter.Here, in sorrow and care enough, she gave
birth to a boy; and as the misery of the mother's condition rendered her
little able to suckle the infant, he was nursed with the milk of a doe,
which the forester who attended her contrived to take alive in a snare.It was not many months afterwards that, in a second encounter of these
fierce clans, MacIan defeated his enemies in his turn, and regained
possession of the district which he had lost.It was with unexpected
rapture that he found his wife and child were in existence, having never
expected to see more of them than the bleached bones, from which the
wolves and wildcats had eaten the flesh."But a strong and prevailing prejudice, such as is often entertained
by these wild people, prevented their chief from enjoying the full
happiness arising from having thus regained his only son in safety.An
ancient prophecy was current among them, that the power of the tribe
should fall by means of a boy born under a bush of holly and suckled
by a white doe.The circumstance, unfortunately for the chief, tallied
exactly with the birth of the only child which remained to him, and it
was demanded of him by the elders of the clan, that the boy should be
either put to death or at least removed from the dominions of the tribe
and brought up in obscurity.Gilchrist MacIan was obliged to consent and
having made choice of the latter proposal, the child, under the name of
Conachar, was brought up in my family, with the purpose, as was at first
intended, of concealing from him all knowledge who or what he was, or of
his pretensions to authority over a numerous and warlike people.But,
as years rolled on, the elders of the tribe, who had exerted so much
authority, were removed by death, or rendered incapable of interfering
in the public affairs by age; while, on the other hand, the influence of
Gilchrist MacIan was increased by his successful struggles against
the Clan Chattan, in which he restored the equality betwixt the two
contending confederacies, which had existed before the calamitous defeat
of which I told your honour.Feeling himself thus firmly seated, he
naturally became desirous to bring home his only son to his bosom and
family; and for that purpose caused me to send the young Conachar, as
he was called, more than once to the Highlands.He was a youth expressly
made, by his form and gallantry of bearing, to gain a father's heart.At length, I suppose the lad either guessed the secret of his birth
or something of it was communicated to him; and the disgust which the
paughty Hieland varlet had always shown for my honest trade became more
manifest; so that I dared not so much as lay my staff over his costard,
for fear of receiving a stab with a dirk, as an answer in Gaelic to
a Saxon remark.It was then that I wished to be well rid of him, the
rather that he showed so much devotion to Catharine, who, forsooth, set
herself up to wash the Ethiopian, and teach a wild Hielandmnan mercy and
morals."Nay, my father," said Catharine, "it was surely but a point of charity
to snatch the brand from the burning.""But a small point of wisdom," said her father, "to risk the burning of
your own fingers for such an end."My lord would not offend the Fair Maid of Perth," said Sir Patrick;
"and he knows well the purity and truth of her mind.And yet I must
needs say that, had this nursling of the doe been shrivelled, haggard,
cross made, and red haired, like some Highlanders I have known, I
question if the Fair Maiden of Perth would have bestowed so much zeal
upon his conversion; and if Catharine had been as aged, wrinkled, and
bent by years as the old woman that opened the door for me this morning,
I would wager my gold spurs against a pair of Highland brogues that this
wild roebuck would never have listened to a second lecture.You laugh,
glover, and Catharine blushes a blush of anger.Let it pass, it is the
way of the world.""The way in which the men of the world esteem their neighbours, my
lord," answered Catharine, with some spirit."Nay, fair saint, forgive a jest," said the knight; "and thou, Simon,
tell us how this tale ended--with Conachar's escape to the Highlands, I
suppose?""With his return thither," said the glover."There was, for some two
or three years, a fellow about Perth, a sort of messenger, who came
and went under divers pretences, but was, in fact, the means of
communication between Gilchrist MacIan and his son, young Conachar, or,
as he is now called, Hector.From this gillie I learned, in general,
that the banishment of the dault an neigh dheil, or foster child of
the white doe, was again brought under consideration of the tribe.His
foster father, Torquil of the Oak, the old forester, appeared with
eight sons, the finest men of the clan, and demanded that the doom of
banishment should be revoked.He spoke with the greater authority, as
he was himself taishatar, or a seer, and supposed to have communication
with the invisible world.He affirmed that he had performed a magical
ceremony, termed tine egan, by which he evoked a fiend, from whom he
extorted a confession that Conachar, now called Eachin, or Hector,
MacIan, was the only man in the approaching combat between the two
hostile clans who should come off without blood or blemish.Hence
Torquil of the Oak argued that the presence of the fated person was
necessary to ensure the victory.'So much I am possessed of this,' said
the forester, 'that, unless Eachin fight in his place in the ranks of
the Clan Quhele, neither I, his foster father, nor any of my eight sons
will lift a weapon in the quarrel.'"This speech was received with much alarm; for the defection of
nine men, the stoutest of their tribe, would be a serious blow, more
especially if the combat, as begins to be rumoured, should be decided by
a small number from each side.The ancient superstition concerning
the foster son of the white doe was counterbalanced by a new and later
prejudice, and the father took the opportunity of presenting to the
clan his long hidden son, whose youthful, but handsome and animated,
countenance, haughty carriage, and active limbs excited the admiration
of the clansmen, who joyfully received him as the heir and descendant of
their chief, notwithstanding the ominous presage attending his birth and
nurture."From this tale, my lord," continued Simon Glover, "your lordship may
easily conceive why I myself should be secure of a good reception among
the Clan Quhele; and you may also have reason to judge that it would be
very rash in me to carry Catharine thither.And this, noble lord, is the
heaviest of my troubles.""We shall lighten the load, then," said Sir Patrick; "and, good glover,
I will take risk for thee and this damsel.My alliance with the Douglas
gives me some interest with Marjory, Duchess of Rothsay, his daughter,
the neglected wife of our wilful Prince.Rely on it, good glover, that
in her retinue thy daughter will be as secure as in a fenced castle.The
Duchess keeps house now at Falkland, a castle which the Duke of Albany,
to whom it belongs, has lent to her for her accommodation.I cannot
promise you pleasure, Fair Maiden; for the Duchess Marjory of Rothsay
is unfortunate, and therefore splenetic, haughty, and overbearing;
conscious of the want of attractive qualities, therefore jealous of
those women who possess them.But she is firm in faith and noble in
spirit, and would fling Pope or prelate into the ditch of her castle who
should come to arrest any one under her protection.You will therefore
have absolute safety, though you may lack comfort.""I have no title to more," said Catharine; "and deeply do I feel the
kindness that is willing to secure me such honourable protection.If she
be haughty, I will remember she is a Douglas, and hath right, as being
such, to entertain as much pride as may become a mortal; if she be
fretful, I will recollect that she is unfortunate, and if she be
unreasonably captious, I will not forget that she is my protectress.Heed no longer for me, my lord, when you have placed me under the noble
lady's charge.But my poor father, to be exposed amongst these wild and
dangerous people!""Think not of that, Catharine," said the glover: "I am as familiar with
brogues and bracken as if I had worn them myself.I have only to fear
that the decisive battle may be fought before I can leave this country;
and if the clan Quhele lose the combat, I may suffer by the ruin of my
protectors.""We must have that cared for," said Sir Patrick: "rely on my looking out
for your safety.But which party will carry the day, think you?""Frankly, my Lord Provost, I believe the Clan Chattan will have the
worse: these nine children of the forest form a third nearly of the band
surrounding the chief of Clan Quhele, and are redoubted champions.""And your apprentice, will he stand to it, thinkest thou?""He is hot as fire, Sir Patrick," answered the glover; "but he is also
unstable as water.Nevertheless, if he is spared, he seems likely to be
one day a brave man.""But, as now, he has some of the white doe's milk still lurking about
his liver, ha, Simon?""He has little experience, my lord," said the glover, "and I need not
tell an honoured warrior like yourself that danger must be familiar to
us ere we can dally with it like a mistress."This conversation brought them speedily to the Castle of Kinfauns,
where, after a short refreshment, it was necessary that the father and
the daughter should part, in order to seek their respective places of
refuge.It was then first, as she saw that her father's anxiety on her
account had drowned all recollections of his friend, that Catharine
dropped, as if in a dream, the name of "Henry Gow.""True--most true," continued her father; "we must possess him of our
purposes.""Leave that to me," said Sir Patrick."I will not trust to a messenger,
nor will I send a letter, because, if I could write one, I think he
could not read it.He will suffer anxiety in the mean while, but I will
ride to Perth tomorrow by times and acquaint him with your designs."It was a bitter moment, but
the manly character of the old burgher, and the devout resignation of
Catharine to the will of Providence made it lighter than might have been
expected.The good knight hurried the departure of the burgess, but
in the kindest manner; and even went so far as to offer him some gold
pieces in loan, which might, where specie was so scarce, be considered
as the ne plus ultra of regard.The glover, however, assured him he
was amply provided, and departed on his journey in a northwesterly
direction.The hospitable protection of Sir Patrick Charteris was no
less manifested towards his fair guest.She was placed under the charge
of a duenna who managed the good knight's household, and was compelled
to remain several days in Kinfauns, owing to the obstacles and delays
interposed by a Tay boatman, named Kitt Henshaw, to whose charge she was
to be committed, and whom the provost highly trusted.Thus were severed the child and parent in a moment of great danger and
difficulty, much augmented by circumstances of which they were then
ignorant, and which seemed greatly to diminish any chance of safety that
remained for them."Austin may do the same again for me."Pope's Prologue to Canterbury Tales from Chaucer.The course of our story will be best pursued by attending that of Simon
Glover.It is not our purpose to indicate the exact local boundaries of
the two contending clans, especially since they are not clearly pointed
out by the historians who have transmitted accounts of this memorable
feud.It is sufficient to say, that the territory of the Clan Chattan
extended far and wide, comprehending Caithness and Sutherland, and
having for their paramount chief the powerful earl of the latter shire,
thence called Mohr ar Chat.In this general sense, the Keiths, the
Sinclairs, the Guns, and other families and clans of great power, were
included in the confederacy.These, however, were not engaged in the
present quarrel, which was limited to that part of the Clan Chattan
occupying the extensive mountainous districts of Perthshire and
Inverness shire, which form a large portion of what is called the
northeastern Highlands.It is well known that two large septs,
unquestionably known to belong to the Clan Chattan, the MacPhersons and
the MacIntoshes, dispute to this day which of their chieftains was at
the head of this Badenoch branch of the great confederacy, and both have
of later times assumed the title of Captain of Clan Chattan.But, at all events, Badenoch must have been the centre of the
confederacy, so far as involved in the feud of which we treat.Of the rival league of Clan Quhele we have a still less distinct
account, for reasons which will appear in the sequel.Some authors have
identified them with the numerous and powerful sept of MacKay.If this
is done on good authority, which is to be doubted, the MacKays must have
shifted their settlements greatly since the reign of Robert III, since
they are now to be found (as a clan) in the extreme northern parts of
Scotland, in the counties of Ross and Sutherland.We cannot, therefore,
be so clear as we would wish in the geography of the story.Suffice
it that, directing his course in a northwesterly direction, the glover
travelled for a day's journey in the direction of the Breadalbane
country, from which he hoped to reach the castle where Gilchrist MacIan,
the captain of the Clan Quhele, and the father of his pupil Conachar,
usually held his residence, with a barbarous pomp of attendance and
ceremonial suited to his lofty pretensions.We need not stop to describe the toil and terrors of such a journey,
where the path was to be traced among wastes and mountains, now
ascending precipitous ravines, now plunging into inextricable bogs,
and often intersected with large brooks, and even rivers.But all these
perils Simon Glover had before encountered in quest of honest gain; and
it was not to be supposed that he shunned or feared them where liberty,
and life itself, were at stake.The danger from the warlike and uncivilised inhabitants of these wilds
would have appeared to another at least as formidable as the perils of
the journey.But Simon's knowledge of the manners and language of the
people assured him on this point also.An appeal to the hospitality of
the wildest Gael was never unsuccessful; and the kerne, that in other
circumstances would have taken a man's life for the silver button of
his cloak, would deprive himself of a meal to relieve the traveller who
implored hospitality at the door of his bothy.The art of travelling in
the Highlands was to appear as confident and defenceless as possible;
and accordingly the glover carried no arms whatever, journeyed without
the least appearance of precaution, and took good care to exhibit
nothing which might excite cupidity.Another rule which he deemed it
prudent to observe was to avoid communication with any of the passengers
whom he might chance to meet, except in the interchange of the common
civilities of salutation, which the Highlanders rarely omit.Few
opportunities occurred of exchanging even such passing greetings.The
country, always lonely, seemed now entirely forsaken; and, even in the
little straths or valleys which he had occasion to pass or traverse,
the hamlets were deserted, and the inhabitants had betaken themselves to
woods and caves.This was easily accounted for, considering the imminent
dangers of a feud which all expected would become one of the most
general signals for plunder and ravage that had ever distracted that
unhappy country.Simon began to be alarmed at this state of desolation.He had made a
halt since he left Kinfauns, to allow his nag some rest; and now he
began to be anxious how he was to pass the night.He had reckoned
upon spending it at the cottage of an old acquaintance, called Niel
Booshalloch (or the cow herd), because he had charge of numerous herds
of cattle belonging to the captain of Clan Quhele, for which purpose he
had a settlement on the banks of the Tay, not far from the spot where
it leaves the lake of the same name.From this his old host and friend,
with whom he had transacted many bargains for hides and furs, the old
glover hoped to learn the present state of the country, the prospect of
peace or war, and the best measures to be taken for his own safety.It
will be remembered that the news of the indentures of battle entered
into for diminishing the extent of the feud had only been communicated
to King Robert the day before the glover left Perth, and did not become
public till some time afterwards."If Niel Booshalloch hath left his dwelling like the rest of them, I
shall be finely holped up," thought Simon, "since I want not only the
advantage of his good advice, but also his interest with Gilchrist
MacIan; and, moreover, a night's quarters and a supper."Thus reflecting, he reached the top of a swelling green hill, and saw
the splendid vision of Loch Tay lying beneath him--an immense plate of
polished silver, its dark heathy mountains and leafless thickets of oak
serving as an arabesque frame to a magnificent mirror.Indifferent to natural beauty at any time, Simon Glover was now
particularly so; and the only part of the splendid landscape on which he
turned his eye was an angle or loop of meadow land where the river Tay,
rushing in full swoln dignity from its parent lake, and wheeling around
a beautiful valley of about a mile in breadth, begins his broad course
to the southeastward, like a conqueror and a legislator, to subdue
and to enrich remote districts.Upon the sequestered spot, which is so
beautifully situated between lake, mountain, and river, arose afterwards
the feudal castle of the Ballough [Balloch is Gaelic for the discharge
of a lake into a river], which in our time has been succeeded by the
splendid palace of the Earls of Breadalbane.But the Campbells, though they had already attained very great power
in Argyleshire, had not yet extended themselves so far eastward as Loch
Tay, the banks of which were, either by right or by mere occupancy,
possessed for, the present by the Clan Quhele, whose choicest herds were
fattened on the Balloch margin of the lake.In this valley, therefore,
between the river and the lake, amid extensive forests of oak wood,
hazel, rowan tree, and larches, arose the humble cottage of Niel
Booshalloch, a village Eumaeus, whose hospitable chimneys were seen to
smoke plentifully, to the great encouragement of Simon Glover, who might
otherwise have been obliged to spend the night in the open air, to his
no small discomfort.He reached the door of the cottage, whistled, shouted, and made his
approach known.There was a baying of hounds and collies, and presently
the master of the hut came forth.There was much care on his brow, and
he seemed surprised at the sight of Simon Glover, though the herdsman
covered both as well as he might; for nothing in that region could be
reckoned more uncivil than for the landlord to suffer anything to escape
him in look or gesture which might induce the visitor to think that
his arrival was an unpleasing, or even an unexpected, incident.The
traveller's horse was conducted to a stable, which was almost too low
to receive him, and the glover himself was led into the mansion of the
Booshalloch, where, according to the custom of the country, bread
and cheese was placed before the wayfarer, while more solid food was
preparing.Simon, who understood all their habits, took no notice of the
obvious marks of sadness on the brow of his entertainer and on those of
the family, until he had eaten somewhat for form's sake, after which he
asked the general question, "Was there any news in the country?""Bad news as ever were told," said the herdsman: "our father is no
more."said Simon, greatly alarmed, "is the captain of the Clan Quhele
dead?""The captain of the Clan Quhele never dies," answered the Booshalloch;
"but Gilchrist MacIan died twenty hours since, and his son, Eachin
MacIan, is now captain.""What, Eachin--that is Conachar--my apprentice?""As little of that subject as you list, brother Simon," said the
herdsman."It is to be remembered, friend, that your craft, which doth
very well for a living in the douce city of Perth, is something too
mechanical to be much esteemed at the foot of Ben Lawers and on the
banks of Loch Tay.We have not a Gaelic word by which we can even name a
maker of gloves.""It would be strange if you had, friend Niel," said Simon, drily,
"having so few gloves to wear.I think there be none in the whole Clan
Quhele, save those which I myself gave to Gilchrist MacIan, whom God
assoilzie, who esteemed them a choice propine.Most deeply do I regret
his death, for I was coming to him on express business.""You had better turn the nag's head southward with morning light," said
the herdsman."The funeral is instantly to take place, and it must be
with short ceremony; for there is a battle to be fought by the Clan
Quhele and the Clan Chattan, thirty champions on a side, as soon as Palm
Sunday next, and we have brief time either to lament the dead or honour
the living.""Yet are my affairs so pressing, that I must needs see the young chief,
were it but for a quarter of an hour," said the glover."Hark thee, friend," replied his host, "I think thy business must be
either to gather money or to make traffic.Now, if the chief owe thee
anything for upbringing or otherwise, ask him not to pay it when all the
treasures of the tribe are called in for making gallant preparation of
arms and equipment for their combatants, that we may meet these proud
hill cats in a fashion to show ourselves their superiors.But if thou
comest to practise commerce with us, thy time is still worse chosen.Thou knowest that thou art already envied of many of our tribe, for
having had the fosterage of the young chief, which is a thing usually
given to the best of the clan."'exclaimed the glover, "men should remember the
office was not conferred on me as a favour which I courted, but that
it was accepted by me on importunity and entreaty, to my no small
prejudice.This Conachar, or Hector, of yours, or whatever you call him,
has destroyed me doe skins to the amount of many pounds Scots.""There again, now," said the Booshalloch, "you have spoken word to cost
your life--any allusion to skins or hides, or especially to deer and
does--may incur no less a forfeit.The chief is young, and jealous of
his rank; none knows the reason better than thou, friend Glover.He
will naturally wish that everything concerning the opposition to
his succession, and having reference to his exile, should be totally
forgotten; and he will not hold him in affection who shall recall the
recollection of his people, or force back his own, upon what they must
both remember with pain.Think how, at such a moment, they will look
on the old glover of Perth, to whom the chief was so long apprentice!Come--come, old friend, you have erred in this.You are in over great
haste to worship the rising sun, while his beams are yet level with the
horizon.Come thou when he has climbed higher in the heavens, and thou
shalt have thy share of the warmth of his noonday height.""Niel Booshalloch," said the glover, "we have been old friends, as thou
say'st; and as I think thee a true one, I will speak to thee freely,
though what I say might be perilous if spoken to others of thy clan.Thou think'st I come hither to make my own profit of thy young chief,
and it is natural thou shouldst think so.But I would not, at my years,
quit my own chimney corner in Curfew Street to bask me in the beams of
the brightest sun that ever shone upon Highland heather.The very truth
is, I come hither in extremity: my foes have the advantage of me, and
have laid things to my charge whereof I am incapable, even in thought.Nevertheless, doom is like to go forth against me, and there is no
remedy but that I must up and fly, or remain and perish.I come to your
young chief, as one who had refuge with me in his distress--who ate of
my bread and drank of my cup.I ask of him refuge, which, as I trust, I
shall need but a short time.""That makes a different case," replied the herdsman."So different,
that, if you came at midnight to the gate of MacIan, having the King
of Scotland's head in your hand, and a thousand men in pursuit for the
avenging of his blood, I could not think it for his honour to refuse you
protection.And for your innocence or guilt, it concerns not the case;
or rather, he ought the more to shelter you if guilty, seeing your
necessity and his risk are both in that case the greater.I must
straightway to him, that no hasty tongue tell him of your arriving
hither without saying the cause.""A pity of your trouble," said the glover; "but where lies the chief?""He is quartered about ten miles hence, busied with the affairs of the
funeral, and with preparations for the combat--the dead to the grave and
the living to battle.""It is a long way, and will take you all night to go and come," said the
glover; "and I am very sure that Conachar when he knows it is I who--"

"Forget Conachar," said the herdsman, placing his finger on his lips."And as for the ten miles, they are but a Highland leap, when one bears
a message between his friend and his chief."So saying, and committing the traveller to the charge of his eldest son
and his daughter, the active herdsman left his house two hours before
midnight, to which he returned long before sunrise.He did not disturb
his wearied guest, but when the old man had arisen in the morning he
acquainted him that the funeral of the late chieftain was to take place
the same day, and that, although Eachin MacIan could not invite a Saxon
to the funeral, he would be glad to receive him at the entertainment
which was to follow."His will must be obeyed," said the glover, half smiling at the change
of relation between himself and his late apprentice."The man is
the master now, and I trust he will remember that, when matters were
otherwise between us, I did not use my authority ungraciously."exclaimed the Booshalloch, "the less of that you say
the better.You will find yourself a right welcome guest to Eachin, and
the deil a man dares stir you within his bounds.But fare you well, for
I must go, as beseems me, to the burial of the best chief the clan ever
had, and the wisest captain that ever cocked the sweet gale (bog myrtle)
in his bonnet.Farewell to you for a while, and if you will go to the
top of the Tom an Lonach behind the house, you will see a gallant sight,
and hear such a coronach as will reach the top of Ben Lawers.A boat
will wait for you, three hours hence, at a wee bit creek about half a
mile westward from the head of the Tay."With these words he took his departure, followed by his three sons, to
man the boat in which he was to join the rest of the mourners, and two
daughters, whose voices were wanted to join in the lament, which was
chanted, or rather screamed, on such occasions of general affliction.Simon Glover, finding himself alone, resorted to the stable to look
after his nag, which, he found, had been well served with graddan, or
bread made of scorched barley.Of this kindness he was fully sensible,
knowing that, probably, the family had little of this delicacy left to
themselves until the next harvest should bring them a scanty supply.In
animal food they were well provided, and the lake found them abundance
of fish for their lenten diet, which they did not observe very strictly;
but bread was a delicacy very scanty in the Highlands.The bogs afforded
a soft species of hay, none of the best to be sure; but Scottish horses,
like their riders, were then accustomed to hard fare.Gauntlet, for this was the name of the palfrey, had his stall crammed
full of dried fern for litter, and was otherwise as well provided for as
Highland hospitality could contrive.Simon Glover being thus left to his own painful reflections, nothing
better remained, after having seen after the comforts of the dumb
companion of his journey, than to follow the herdsman's advice; and
ascending towards the top of an eminence called Tom an Lonach, or the
Knoll of Yew Trees, after a walk of half an hour he reached the summit,
and could look down on the broad expanse of the lake, of which the
height commanded a noble view.A few aged and scattered yew trees
of great size still vindicated for the beautiful green hill the name
attached to it.But a far greater number had fallen a sacrifice to
the general demand for bow staves in that warlike age, the bow being a
weapon much used by the mountaineers, though those which they employed,
as well as their arrows, were, in shape and form, and especially in
efficacy, far inferior to the archery of merry England.The dark and
shattered individual yews which remained were like the veterans of a
broken host, occupying in disorder some post of advantage, with the
stern purpose of resisting to the last.Behind this eminence, but
detached from it, arose a higher hill, partly covered with copsewood,
partly opening into glades of pasture, where the cattle strayed,
finding, at this season of the year, a scanty sustenance among the
spring heads and marshy places, where the fresh grass began first to
arise.The opposite or northern shore of the lake presented a far more Alpine
prospect than that upon which the glover was stationed.Woods and
thickets ran up the sides of the mountains, and disappeared among the
sinuosities formed by the winding ravines which separated them from each
other; but far above these specimens of a tolerable natural soil arose
the swart and bare mountains themselves, in the dark grey desolation
proper to the season.Some were peaked, some broad crested, some rocky and precipitous, others
of a tamer outline; and the clan of Titans seemed to be commanded by
their appropriate chieftains--the frowning mountain of Ben Lawers, and
the still more lofty eminence of Ben Mohr, arising high above the rest,
whose peaks retain a dazzling helmet of snow far into the summer season,
and sometimes during the whole year.Yet the borders of this wild and
silvan region, where the mountains descended upon the lake, intimated,
even at that early period, many traces of human habitation.Hamlets were
seen, especially on the northern margin of the lake, half hid among the
little glens that poured their tributary streams into Loch Tay, which,
like many earthly things, made a fair show at a distance, but, when more
closely approached, were disgustful and repulsive, from their squalid
want of the conveniences which attend even Indian wigwams.They were
inhabited by a race who neither cultivated the earth nor cared for
the enjoyments which industry procures.The women, although otherwise
treated with affection, and even delicacy of respect, discharged all the
absolutely necessary domestic labour.The men, excepting some reluctant
use of an ill formed plough, or more frequently a spade, grudgingly gone
through, as a task infinitely beneath them, took no other employment
than the charge of the herds of black cattle, in which their wealth
consisted.At all other times they hunted, fished, or marauded, during
the brief intervals of peace, by way of pastime; plundering with bolder
license, and fighting with embittered animosity, in time of war, which,
public or private, upon a broader or more restricted scale, formed the
proper business of their lives, and the only one which they esteemed
worthy of them.The magnificent bosom of the lake itself was a scene to gaze on with
delight.Its noble breadth, with its termination in a full and beautiful
run, was rendered yet more picturesque by one of those islets which are
often happily situated in the Scottish lakes.The ruins upon that isle,
now almost shapeless, being overgrown with wood rose, at the time we
speak of, into the towers and pinnacles of a priory, where slumbered
the remains of Sibylla, daughter of Henry I of England, and consort
of Alexander the First of Scotland.This holy place had been deemed of
dignity sufficient to be the deposit of the remains of the captain of
the Clan Quhele, at least till times when the removal of the danger, now
so imminently pressing, should permit of his body being conveyed to a
distinguished convent in the north, where he was destined ultimately to
repose with all his ancestry.A number of boats pushed off from various points of the near and more
distant shore, many displaying sable banners, and others having their
several pipers in the bow, who from time to time poured forth a few
notes of a shrill, plaintive, and wailing character, and intimated to
the glover that the ceremony was about to take place.These sounds of
lamentation were but the tuning as it were of the instruments, compared
with the general wail which was speedily to be raised.A distant sound was heard from far up the lake, even as it seemed from
the remote and distant glens out of which the Dochart and the Lochy pour
their streams into Loch Tay.It was in a wild, inaccessible spot, where
the Campbells at a subsequent period founded their strong fortress of
Finlayrigg, that the redoubted commander of the Clan Quhele drew his
last breath; and, to give due pomp to his funeral, his corpse was now to
be brought down the loch to the island assigned for his temporary place
of rest.The funeral fleet, led by the chieftain's barge, from which a
huge black banner was displayed, had made more than two thirds of its
voyage ere it was visible from the eminence on which Simon Glover stood
to overlook the ceremony.The instant the distant wail of the coronach
was heard proceeding from the attendants on the funeral barge, all the
subordinate sounds of lamentation were hushed at once, as the raven
ceases to croak and the hawk to whistle whenever the scream of the eagle
is heard.The boats, which had floated hither and thither upon the lake,
like a flock of waterfowl dispersing themselves on its surface, now drew
together with an appearance of order, that the funeral flotilla might
pass onward, and that they themselves might fall into their proper
places.In the mean while the piercing din of the war pipes became
louder and louder, and the cry from the numberless boats which followed
that from which the black banner of the chief was displayed rose in
wild unison up to the Tom an Lonach, from which the glover viewed the
spectacle.The galley which headed the procession bore on its poop a
species of scaffold, upon which, arrayed in white linen, and with the
face bare, was displayed the corpse of the deceased chieftain.His son
and the nearest relatives filled the vessel, while a great number of
boats, of every description that could be assembled, either on Loch
Tay itself or brought by land carriage from Loch Earn and otherwise,
followed in the rear, some of them of very frail materials.There were
even curraghs, composed of ox hides stretched over hoops of willow,
in the manner of the ancient British, and some committed themselves
to rafts formed for the occasion, from the readiest materials that
occurred, and united in such a precarious manner as to render it
probable that, before the accomplishment of the voyage, some of the
clansmen of the deceased might be sent to attend their chieftain in the
world of spirits.When the principal flotilla came in sight of the smaller group of boats
collected towards the foot of the lake, and bearing off from the little
island, they hailed each other with a shout so loud and general, and
terminating in a cadence so wildly prolonged, that not only the deer
started from their glens for miles around, and sought the distant
recesses of the mountains, but even the domestic cattle, accustomed to
the voice of man, felt the full panic which the human shout strikes into
the wilder tribes, and like them fled from their pasture into morasses
and dingles.Summoned forth from their convent by those sounds, the monks who
inhabited the little islet began to issue from their lowly portal, with
cross and banner, and as much of ecclesiastical state as they had the
means of displaying; their bells at the same time, of which the edifice
possessed three, pealing the death toll over the long lake, which came
to the ears of the now silent multitude, mingled with the solemn chant
of the Catholic Church, raised by the monks in their procession.Various
ceremonies were gone through, while the kindred of the deceased carried
the body ashore, and, placing it on a bank long consecrated to the
purpose, made the deasil around the departed.When the corpse was
uplifted to be borne into the church, another united yell burst from the
assembled multitude, in which the deep shout of warriors and the shrill
wail of females joined their notes with the tremulous voice of age and
the babbling cry of childhood.The coronach was again, and for the last
time, shrieked as the body was carried into the interior of the
church, where only the nearest relatives of the deceased and the most
distinguished of the leaders of the clan were permitted to enter.The
last yell of woe was so terribly loud, and answered by so many hundred
echoes, that the glover instinctively raised his hands to his ears, to
shut out, or deaden at least, a sound so piercing.He kept this attitude
while the hawks, owls, and other birds, scared by the wild scream, had
begun to settle in their retreats, when, as he withdrew his hands, a
voice close by him said:

"Think you this, Simon Glover, the hymn of penitence and praise with
which it becomes poor forlorn man, cast out from his tenement of clay,
to be wafted into the presence of his maker?"The glover turned, and in the old man with a long white beard who stood
close beside him had no difficulty, from the clear mild eye and the
benevolent cast of features, to recognise the Carthusian monk Father
Clement, no longer wearing his monastic habiliments, but wrapped in a
frieze mantle and having a Highland cap on his head.It may be recollected that the glover regarded this man with a combined
feeling of respect and dislike--respect, which his judgment could not
deny to the monk's person and character, and dislike, which arose from
Father Clement's peculiar doctrines being the cause of his daughter's
exile and his own distress.It was not, therefore, with sentiments of
unmixed satisfaction that he returned the greetings of the father, and
replied to the reiterated question, what he thought of the funeral rites
which were discharged in so wild a manner: "I know not, my good father;
but these men do their duty to their deceased chief according to the
fashion of their ancestors: they mean to express their regret for their
friend's loss and their prayers to Heaven in his behalf; and that which
is done of goodwill must, to my thinking, be accepted favourably.Had
it been otherwise, methinks they had ere now been enlightened to do
better.""Thou art deceived," answered the monk."God has sent His light amongst
us all, though in various proportions; but man wilfully shuts his eyes
and prefers darkness.This benighted people mingle with the ritual of
the Roman Church the old heathen ceremonies of their own fathers, and
thus unite with the abominations of a church corrupted by wealth and
power the cruel and bloody ritual of savage paynims.""Father," said Simon, abruptly, "methinks your presence were more
useful in yonder chapel, aiding your brethren in the discharge of their
clerical duties, than in troubling and unsettling the belief of an
humble though ignorant Christian like myself.""And wherefore say, good brother, that I would unfix thy principles of
belief?""So Heaven deal with me, as, were my life
blood necessary to cement the mind of any man to the holy religion he
professeth, it should be freely poured out for the purpose.""Your speech is fair, father, I grant you," said the glover; "but if I
am to judge the doctrine by the fruits, Heaven has punished me by the
hand of the church for having hearkened thereto.Ere I heard you, my
confessor was little moved though I might have owned to have told
a merry tale upon the ale bench, even if a friar or a nun were the
subject.If at a time I had called Father Hubert a better hunter of
hares than of souls, I confessed me to the Vicar Vinesauf, who laughed
and made me pay a reckoning for penance; or if I had said that the Vicar
Vinesauf was more constant to his cup than to his breviary, I confessed
me to Father Hubert, and a new hawking glove made all well again; and
thus I, my conscience, and Mother Church lived together on terms of
peace, friendship, and mutual forbearance.But since I have listened to
you, Father Clement, this goodly union is broke to pieces, and nothing
is thundered in my ear but purgatory in the next world and fire and
fagot in this.Therefore, avoid you, Father Clement, or speak to those
who can understand your doctrine.I have no heart to be a martyr: I have
never in my whole life had courage enough so much as to snuff a candle
with my fingers; and, to speak the truth, I am minded to go back to
Perth, sue out my pardon in the spiritual court, carry my fagot to the
gallows foot in token of recantation, and purchase myself once more the
name of a good Catholic, were it at the price of all the worldly wealth
that remains to me.""You are angry, my dearest brother," said Clement, "and repent you on
the pinch of a little worldly danger and a little worldly loss for the
good thoughts which you once entertained.""You speak at ease, Father Clement, since I think you have long forsworn
the wealth and goods of the world, and are prepared to yield up your
life when it is demanded in exchange for the doctrine you preach and
believe.You are as ready to put on your pitched shirt and brimstone
head gear as a naked man is to go to his bed, and it would seem you have
not much more reluctance to the ceremony.But I still wear that which
clings to me.My wealth is still my own, and I thank Heaven it is a
decent pittance whereon to live; my life, too, is that of a hale old man
of sixty, who is in no haste to bring it to a close; and if I were
poor as Job and on the edge of the grave, must I not still cling to my
daughter, whom your doctrines have already cost so dear?""Thy daughter, friend Simon," said the Carmelite [Carthusian], "may be
truly called an angel upon earth.""Ay, and by listening to your doctrines, father, she is now like to be
called on to be an angel in heaven, and to be transported thither in a
chariot of fire.""Nay, my good brother," said Clement, "desist, I pray you, to speak of
what you little understand.Since it is wasting time to show thee the
light that thou chafest against, yet listen to that which I have to say
touching thy daughter, whose temporal felicity, though I weigh it not
even for an instant in the scale against that which is spiritual, is,
nevertheless, in its order, as dear to Clement Blair as to her own
father."The tears stood in the old man's eyes as he spoke, and Simon Glover was
in some degree mollified as he again addressed him."One would think thee, Father Clement, the kindest and most amiable of
men; how comes it, then, that thy steps are haunted by general ill
will wherever thou chancest to turn them?I could lay my life thou hast
contrived already to offend yonder half score of poor friars in their
water girdled cage, and that you have been prohibited from attendance on
the funeral?""Even so, my son," said the Carthusian, "and I doubt whether their
malice will suffer me to remain in this country.I did but speak a few
sentences about the superstition and folly of frequenting St.Fillan's
church, to detect theft by means of his bell, of bathing mad patients in
his pool, to cure their infirmity of mind; and lo!the persecutors have
cast me forth of their communion, as they will speedily cast me out of
this life.""Lo you there now," said the glover, "see what it is for a man that
cannot take a warning!Well, Father Clement, men will not cast me forth
unless it were as a companion of yours.I pray you, therefore, tell me
what you have to say of my daughter, and let us be less neighbours than
we have been.""This, then, brother Simon, I have to acquaint you with.This young
chief, who is swoln with contemplation of his own power and glory, loves
one thing better than it all, and that is thy daughter.""My runagate apprentice look up to my
daughter!"said Clement, "how close sits our worldly pride, even as ivy
clings to the wall, and cannot be separated!Look up to thy daughter,
good Simon?The captain of Clan Quhele, great as he is, and
greater as he soon expects to be, looks down to the daughter of the
Perth burgess, and considers himself demeaned in doing so.But, to use
his own profane expression, Catharine is dearer to him than life here
and Heaven hereafter: he cannot live without her.""Then he may die, if he lists," said Simon Glover, "for she is betrothed
to an honest burgess of Perth; and I would not break my word to make my
daughter bride to the Prince of Scotland.""I thought it would be your answer," replied the monk; "I would, worthy
friend, thou couldst carry into thy spiritual concerns some part of that
daring and resolved spirit with which thou canst direct thy temporal
affairs.""Hush thee--hush, Father Clement!"answered the glover; "when thou
fallest into that vein of argument, thy words savour of blazing tar, and
that is a scent I like not.As to Catharine, I must manage as I can, so
as not to displease the young dignitary; but well is it for me that she
is far beyond his reach.""She must then be distant indeed," said the Carmelite [Carthusian]."And now, brother Simon, since you think it perilous to own me and my
opinions, I must walk alone with my own doctrines and the dangers they
draw on me.But should your eye, less blinded than it now is by worldly
hopes and fears, ever turn a glance back on him who soon may be snatched
from you, remember, that by nought save a deep sense of the truth and
importance of the doctrine which he taught could Clement Blair have
learned to encounter, nay, to provoke, the animosity of the powerful and
inveterate, to alarm the fears of the jealous and timid, to walk in the
world as he belonged not to it, and to be accounted mad of men, that he
might, if possible, win souls to God.Heaven be my witness, that I would
comply in all lawful things to conciliate the love and sympathy of my
fellow creatures!It is no light thing to be shunned by the worthy as
an infected patient, to be persecuted by the Pharisees of the day as an
unbelieving heretic, to be regarded with horror at once and contempt by
the multitude, who consider me as a madman, who may be expected to turn
mischievous.But were all those evils multiplied an hundredfold, the
fire within must not be stifled, the voice which says within me 'Speak'
must receive obedience.Woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel, even
should I at length preach it from amidst the pile of flames!"So spoke this bold witness, one of those whom Heaven raised up from time
to time to preserve amidst the most ignorant ages, and to carry down to
those which succeed them, a manifestation of unadulterated Christianity,
from the time of the Apostles to the age when, favoured by the invention
of printing, the Reformation broke out in full splendour.The selfish
policy of the glover was exposed in his own eyes; and he felt himself
contemptible as he saw the Carthusian turn from him in all the
hallowedness of resignation.He was even conscious of a momentary
inclination to follow the example of the preacher's philanthropy and
disinterested zeal, but it glanced like a flash of lightning through a
dark vault, where there lies nothing to catch the blaze; and he slowly
descended the hill in a direction different from that of the Carthusian,
forgetting him and his doctrines, and buried in anxious thoughts about
his child's fate and his own.What want these outlaws conquerors should have
     But history's purchased page to call them great,
     A wider space, an ornamented grave?Their hopes were not less warm, their souls were full as brave.The funeral obsequies being over, the same flotilla which had proceeded
in solemn and sad array down the lake prepared to return with displayed
banners, and every demonstration of mirth and joy; for there was but
brief time to celebrate festivals when the awful conflict betwixt the
Clan Quhele and their most formidable rivals so nearly approached.It
had been agreed, therefore, that the funeral feast should be blended
with that usually given at the inauguration of the young chief.Some objections were made to this arrangement, as containing an evil
omen.But, on the other hand, it had a species of recommendation, from
the habits and feelings of the Highlanders, who, to this day, are wont
to mingle a degree of solemn mirth with their mourning, and something
resembling melancholy with their mirth.The usual aversion to speak
or think of those who have been beloved and lost is less known to this
grave and enthusiastic race than it is to others.You hear not only the
young mention (as is everywhere usual) the merits and the character of
parents, who have, in the course of nature, predeceased them; but the
widowed partner speaks, in ordinary conversation, of the lost spouse,
and, what is still stranger, the parents allude frequently to the beauty
or valour of the child whom they have interred.The Scottish Highlanders
appear to regard the separation of friends by death as something less
absolute and complete than it is generally esteemed in other countries,
and converse of the dear connexions who have sought the grave before
them as if they had gone upon a long journey in which they themselves
must soon follow.The funeral feast, therefore, being a general custom
throughout Scotland, was not, in the opinion of those who were to share
it, unseemingly mingled, on the present occasion, with the festivities
which hailed the succession to the chieftainship.The barge which had lately borne the dead to the grave now conveyed
the young MacIan to his new command and the minstrels sent forth their
gayest notes to gratulate Eachin's succession, as they had lately
sounded their most doleful dirges when carrying Gilchrist to his grave.From the attendant flotilla rang notes of triumph and jubilee, instead
of those yells of lamentation which had so lately disturbed the echoes
of Loch Tay; and a thousand voices hailed the youthful chieftain as he
stood on the poop, armed at all points, in the flower of early manhood,
beauty, and activity, on the very spot where his father's corpse had so
lately been extended, and surrounded by triumphant friends, as that had
been by desolate mourners.One boat kept closest of the flotilla to the honoured galley.Torquil
of the Oak, a grizzled giant, was steersman; and his eight sons, each
exceeding the ordinary stature of mankind, pulled the oars.Like some
powerful and favourite wolf hound, unloosed from his couples, and
frolicking around a liberal master, the boat of the foster brethren
passed the chieftain's barge, now on one side and now on another, and
even rowed around it, as if in extravagance of joy; while, at the same
time, with the jealous vigilance of the animal we have compared it to,
they made it dangerous for any other of the flotilla to approach so near
as themselves, from the risk of being run down by their impetuous
and reckless manoeuvres.Raised to an eminent rank in the clan by the
succession of their foster brother to the command of the Clan Quhele,
this was the tumultuous and almost terrible mode in which they testified
their peculiar share in their chief's triumph.Far behind, and with different feelings, on the part of one at least of
the company, came the small boat in which, manned by the Booshalloch and
one of his sons, Simon Glover was a passenger."If we are bound for the head of the lake," said Simon to his friend,
"we shall hardly be there for hours."But as he spoke the crew of the boat of the foster brethren, or
leichtach, on a signal from the chief's galley, lay on their oars until
the Booshalloch's boat came up, and throwing on board a rope of hides,
which Niel made fast to the head of his skiff, they stretched to their
oars once more, and, notwithstanding they had the small boat in tow,
swept through the lake with almost the same rapidity as before.The
skiff was tugged on with a velocity which seemed to hazard the pulling
her under water, or the separation of her head from her other timbers.Simon Glover saw with anxiety the reckless fury of their course, and the
bows of the boat occasionally brought within an inch or two of the level
of the water; and though his friend, Niel Booshalloch, assured him it
was all done in especial honour, he heartily wished his voyage might
have a safe termination.It had so, and much sooner than he apprehended;
for the place of festivity was not four miles distant from the
sepulchral island, being chosen to suit the chieftain's course, which
lay to the southeast, so soon as the banquet should be concluded.A
bay on the southern side of Loch Tay presented a beautiful beach of
sparkling sand, on which the boats might land with ease, and a dry
meadow, covered with turf, verdant considering the season, behind and
around which rose high banks, fringed with copsewood, and displaying the
lavish preparations which had been made for the entertainment.The Highlanders, well known for ready hatchet men, had constructed a
long arbour or silvan banqueting room, capable of receiving two hundred
men, while a number of smaller huts around seemed intended for sleeping
apartments.The uprights, the couples, and roof tree of the temporary
hall were composed of mountain pine, still covered with its bark.The
framework of the sides was of planks or spars of the same material,
closely interwoven with the leafy boughs of the fir and other
evergreens, which the neighbouring woods afforded, while the hills had
furnished plenty of heath to form the roof.Within this silvan palace
the most important personages present were invited to hold high
festival.Others of less note were to feast in various long sheds
constructed with less care; and tables of sod, or rough planks, placed
in the open air, were allotted to the numberless multitude.At a
distance were to be seen piles of glowing charcoal or blazing wood,
around which countless cooks toiled, bustled, and fretted, like so many
demons working in their native element.Pits, wrought in the hillside,
and lined with heated stones, served as ovens for stewing immense
quantities of beef, mutton, and venison; wooden spits supported sheep
and goats, which were roasted entire; others were cut into joints,
and seethed in caldrons made of the animal's own skins, sewed hastily
together and filled with water; while huge quantities of pike, trout,
salmon, and char were broiled with more ceremony on glowing embers.The
glover had seen many a Highland banquet, but never one the preparations
for which were on such a scale of barbarous profusion.He had little time, however, to admire the scene around him for, as
soon as they landed on the beach, the Booshalloch observed with some
embarrassment, that, as they had not been bidden to the table of the
dais, to which he seemed to have expected an invitation, they had best
secure a place in one of the inferior bothies or booths; and was leading
the way in that direction, when he was stopped by one of the bodyguards,
seeming to act as master of ceremonies, who whispered something in his
ear."I thought so," said the herdsman, much relieved--"I thought neither the
stranger nor the man that has my charge would be left out at the high
table."They were conducted accordingly into the ample lodge, within which were
long ranges of tables already mostly occupied by the guests, while those
who acted as domestics were placing upon them the abundant though rude
materials of the festival.The young chief, although he certainly saw
the glover and the herdsman enter, did not address any personal salute
to either, and their places were assigned them in a distant corner, far
beneath the salt, a huge piece of antique silver plate, the only article
of value that the table displayed, and which was regarded by the clan
as a species of palladium, only produced and used on the most solemn
occasions, such as the present.The Booshalloch, somewhat discontented, muttered to Simon as he took his
place: "These are changed days, friend.His father, rest his soul, would
have spoken to us both; but these are bad manners which he has learned
among you Sassenachs in the Low Country."To this remark the glover did not think it necessary to reply; instead
of which he adverted to the evergreens, and particularly to the skins
and other ornaments with which the interior of the bower was decorated.The most remarkable part of these ornaments was a number of Highland
shirts of mail, with steel bonnets, battle axes, and two handed swords
to match, which hung around the upper part of the room, together with
targets highly and richly embossed.Each mail shirt was hung over a well
dressed stag's hide, which at once displayed the armour to advantage and
saved it from suffering by damp."These," whispered the Booshalloch, "are the arms of the chosen
champions of the Clan Quhele.They are twenty-nine in number, as you
see, Eachin himself being the thirtieth, who wears his armour today,
else had there been thirty.And he has not got such a good hauberk after
all as he should wear on Palm Sunday.These nine suits of harness, of
such large size, are for the leichtach, from whom so much is expected.""And these goodly deer hides," said Simon, the spirit of his profession
awakening at the sight of the goods in which he traded--"think you the
chief will be disposed to chaffer for them?They are in demand for the
doublets which knights wear under their armour.""Did I not pray you," said Niel Booshalloch, "to say nothing on that
subject?""It is the mail shirts I speak of," said Simon--"may I ask if any of
them were made by our celebrated Perth armourer, called Henry of the
Wynd?""Thou art more unlucky than before," said Niel, "that man's name is to
Eachin's temper like a whirlwind upon the lake; yet no man knows for
what cause.""I can guess," thought our glover, but gave no utterance to the thought;
and, having twice lighted on unpleasant subjects of conversation, he
prepared to apply himself, like those around him, to his food, without
starting another topic.We have said as much of the preparations as may lead the reader to
conclude that the festival, in respect of the quality of the food, was
of the most rude description, consisting chiefly of huge joints of meat,
which were consumed with little respect to the fasting season, although
several of the friars of the island convent graced and hallowed the
board by their presence.The platters were of wood, and so were the
hooped cogues or cups out of which the guests quaffed their liquor, as
also the broth or juice of the meat, which was held a delicacy.There
were also various preparations of milk which were highly esteemed, and
were eaten out of similar vessels.Bread was the scarcest article at the
banquet, but the glover and his patron Niel were served with two small
loaves expressly for their own use.In eating, as, indeed, was then the
case all over Britain, the guests used their knives called skenes, or
the large poniards named dirks, without troubling themselves by the
reflection that they might occasionally have served different or more
fatal purposes.At the upper end of the table stood a vacant seat, elevated a step or
two above the floor.It was covered with a canopy of hollow boughs and
ivy, and there rested against it a sheathed sword and a folded banner.This had been the seat of the deceased chieftain, and was left vacant
in honour of him.Eachin occupied a lower chair on the right hand of the
place of honour.The reader would be greatly mistaken who should follow out this
description by supposing that the guests behaved like a herd of hungry
wolves, rushing upon a feast rarely offered to them.On the contrary,
the Clan Quhele conducted themselves with that species of courteous
reserve and attention to the wants of others which is often found in
primitive nations, especially such as are always in arms, because a
general observance of the rules of courtesy is necessary to prevent
quarrels, bloodshed, and death.The guests took the places assigned them
by Torquil of the Oak, who, acting as marischal taeh, i.e.sewer of
the mess, touched with a white wand, without speaking a word, the place
where each was to sit.Thus placed in order, the company patiently
waited for the portion assigned them, which was distributed among them
by the leichtach; the bravest men or more distinguished warriors of
the tribe being accommodated with a double mess, emphatically called
bieyfir, or the portion of a man.When the sewers themselves had seen
every one served, they resumed their places at the festival, and were
each served with one of these larger messes of food.Water was placed
within each man's reach, and a handful of soft moss served the purposes
of a table napkin, so that, as at an Eastern banquet, the hands were
washed as often as the mess was changed.For amusement, the bard recited
the praises of the deceased chief, and expressed the clan's confidence
in the blossoming virtues of his successor.The seannachie recited the
genealogy of the tribe, which they traced to the race of the Dalriads;
the harpers played within, while the war pipes cheered the multitude
without.The conversation among the guests was grave, subdued, and
civil; no jest was attempted beyond the bounds of a very gentle
pleasantry, calculated only to excite a passing smile.There were no
raised voices, no contentious arguments; and Simon Glover had heard a
hundred times more noise at a guild feast in Perth than was made on this
occasion by two hundred wild mountaineers.Even the liquor itself did not seem to raise the festive party above the
same tone of decorous gravity.Wine appeared in
very small quantities, and was served out only to the principal guests,
among which honoured number Simon Glover was again included.The wine
and the two wheaten loaves were indeed the only marks of notice which he
received during the feast; but Niel Booshalloch, jealous of his master's
reputation for hospitality, failed not to enlarge on them as proofs
of high distinction.Distilled liquors, since so generally used in
the Highlands, were then comparatively unknown.The usquebaugh was
circulated in small quantities, and was highly flavoured with a
decoction of saffron and other herbs, so as to resemble a medicinal
potion rather than a festive cordial.Cider and mead were seen at the
entertainment, but ale, brewed in great quantities for the purpose, and
flowing round without restriction, was the liquor generally used, and
that was drunk with a moderation much less known among the more modern
Highlanders.A cup to the memory of the deceased chieftain was the first
pledge solemnly proclaimed after the banquet was finished, and a low
murmur of benedictions was heard from the company, while the monks
alone, uplifting their united voices, sung Requiem eternam dona.An
unusual silence followed, as if something extraordinary was expected,
when Eachin arose with a bold and manly, yet modest, grace, and ascended
the vacant seat or throne, saying with dignity and firmness:

"This seat and my father's inheritance I claim as my right--so prosper
me God and St."How will you rule your father's children?"said an old man, the uncle
of the deceased."I will defend them with my father's sword, and distribute justice to
them under my father's banner."The old man, with a trembling hand, unsheathed the ponderous weapon,
and, holding it by the blade, offered the hilt to the young chieftain's
grasp; at the same time Torquil of the Oak unfurled the pennon of the
tribe, and swung it repeatedly over Eachin's head, who, with singular
grace and dexterity, brandished the huge claymore as in its defence.The guests raised a yelling shout to testify their acceptance of the
patriarchal chief who claimed their allegiance, nor was there any who,
in the graceful and agile youth before them, was disposed to recollect
the subject of sinister vaticinations.As he stood in glittering mail,
resting on the long sword, and acknowledging by gracious gestures the
acclamations which rent the air within, without, and around, Simon
Glover was tempted to doubt whether this majestic figure was that of the
same lad whom he had often treated with little ceremony, and began to
have some apprehension of the consequences of having done so.A
general burst of minstrelsy succeeded to the acclamations, and rock and
greenwood rang to harp and pipes, as lately to shout and yell of woe.It would be tedious to pursue the progress of the inaugural feast, or
detail the pledges that were quaffed to former heroes of the clan, and
above all to the twenty-nine brave galloglasses who were to fight in the
approaching conflict, under the eye and leading of their young chief.The bards, assuming in old times the prophetic character combined with
their own, ventured to assure them of the most distinguished victory,
and to predict the fury with which the blue falcon, the emblem of the
Clan Quhele, should rend to pieces the mountain cat, the well known
badge of the Clan Chattan.It was approaching sunset when a bowl, called the grace cup, made of
oak, hooped with silver, was handed round the table as the signal of
dispersion, although it was left free to any who chose a longer carouse
to retreat to any of the outer bothies.As for Simon Glover, the
Booshalloch conducted him to a small hut, contrived, it would seem,
for the use of a single individual, where a bed of heath and moss was
arranged as well as the season would permit, and an ample supply of
such delicacies as the late feast afforded showed that all care had been
taken for the inhabitant's accommodation."Do not leave this hut," said the Booshalloch, taking leave of his
friend and protege: "this is your place of rest.But apartments are lost
on such a night of confusion, and if the badger leaves his hole the toad
will creep into it."To Simon Glover this arrangement was by no means disagreeable.He had
been wearied by the noise of the day, and felt desirous of repose.After
eating, therefore, a morsel, which his appetite scarce required, and
drinking a cup of wine to expel the cold, he muttered his evening
prayer, wrapt himself in his cloak, and lay down on a couch which old
acquaintance had made familiar and easy to him.The hum and murmur,
and even the occasional shouts, of some of the festive multitude who
continued revelling without did not long interrupt his repose, and in
about ten minutes he was as fast asleep as if he had lain in his own bed
in Curfew Street.Two hours before the black cock crew, Simon Glover was wakened by a well
known voice, which called him by name.he replied, as he started from sleep, "is the morning
so far advanced?"and, raising his eyes, the person of whom he was
dreaming stood before him; and at the same moment, the events of
yesterday rushing on his recollection, he saw with surprise that the
vision retained the form which sleep had assigned it, and it was not the
mail clad Highland chief, with claymore in hand, as he had seen him
the preceding night, but Conachar of Curfew Street, in his humble
apprentice's garb, holding in his hand a switch of oak.An apparition
would not more have surprised our Perth burgher.As he gazed with
wonder, the youth turned upon him a piece of lighted bog wood which he
carried in a lantern, and to his waking exclamation replied:

"Even so, father Simon: it is Conachar, come to renew our old
acquaintance, when our intercourse will attract least notice."So saying, he sat down on a tressel which answered the purpose of
a chair, and placing the lantern beside him, proceeded in the most
friendly tone:

"I have tasted of thy good cheer many a day, father Simon; I trust thou
hast found no lack in my family?""None whatever, Eachin MacIan," answered the glover, for the simplicity
of the Celtic language and manners rejects all honorary titles; "it was
even too good for this fasting season, and much too good for me, since I
must be ashamed to think how hard you fared in Curfew Street.""Even too well, to use your own word," said Conachar, "for the deserts
of an idle apprentice and for the wants of a young Highlander.But
yesterday, if there was, as I trust, enough of food, found you not, good
glover, some lack of courteous welcome?Excuse it not--I know you did
so.But I am young in authority with my people, and I must not too early
draw their attention to the period of my residence in the Lowlands,
which, however, I can never forget.""I understand the cause entirely," said Simon; "and therefore it is
unwillingly, and as it were by force, that I have made so early a visit
hither."It is well you are come to see some of my Highland
splendour while it yet sparkles.Return after Palm Sunday, and who knows
whom or what you may find in the territories we now possess!The
wildcat may have made his lodge where the banqueting bower of MacIan now
stands."The young chief was silent, and pressed the top of the rod to his lips,
as if to guard against uttering more."There is no fear of that, Eachin," said Simon, in that vague way in
which lukewarm comforters endeavour to turn the reflections of their
friends from the consideration of inevitable danger."There is fear, and there is peril of utter ruin," answered Eachin, "and
there is positive certainty of great loss.I marvel my father consented
to this wily proposal of Albany.I would MacGillie Chattanach would
agree with me, and then, instead of wasting our best blood against
each other, we would go down together to Strathmore and kill and take
possession.I would rule at Perth and he at Dundee, and all the great
strath should be our own to the banks of the Firth of Tay.Such is the
policy I have caught from your old grey head, father Simon, when holding
a trencher at thy back, and listening to thy evening talk with Bailie
Craigdallie.""The tongue is well called an unruly member," thought the glover."Here have I been holding a candle to the devil, to show him the way to
mischief."But he only said aloud: "These plans come too late.""The indentures of battle are signed
by our marks and seals, the burning hate of the Clan Quhele and Clan
Chattan is blown up to an inextinguishable flame by mutual insults and
boasts.But to thine own affairs, father
Glover.It is religion that has brought thee hither, as I learn from
Niel Booshalloch.Surely, my experience of thy prudence did not lead
me to suspect thee of any quarrel with Mother Church.As for my old
acquaintance, Father Clement, he is one of those who hunt after the
crown of martyrdom, and think a stake, surrounded with blazing fagots,
better worth embracing than a willing bride.He is a very knight errant
in defence of his religious notions, and does battle wherever he comes.He hath already a quarrel with the monks of Sibyl's Isle yonder about
some point of doctrine."I have," answered Simon; "but we spoke little together, the time being
pressing.""He may have said that there is a third person--one more likely, I
think, to be a true fugitive for religion than either you, a shrewd
citizen, or he, a wrangling preacher--who would be right heartily
welcome to share our protection?Thou art dull, man, and wilt not guess
my meaning--thy daughter, Catharine."These last words the young chief spoke in English; and he continued the
conversation in that language, as if apprehensive of being overheard,
and, indeed, as if under the sense of some involuntary hesitation."My daughter Catharine," said the glover, remembering what the
Carthusian had told him, "is well and safe.""And wherefore came she
not with you?Think you the Clan Quhele have no cailliachs as active as
old Dorothy, whose hand has warmed my haffits before now, to wait upon
the daughter of their chieftain's master?""Again I thank you," said the glover, "and doubt neither your power nor
your will to protect my daughter, as well as myself.But an honourable
lady, the friend of Sir Patrick Charteris, hath offered her a safe place
of refuge without the risk of a toilsome journey through a desolate and
distracted country.""Oh, ay, Sir Patrick Charteris," said Eachin, in a more reserved and
distant tone; "he must be preferred to all men, without doubt.Simon Glover longed to punish this affectation of a boy who had been
scolded four times a day for running into the street to see Sir Patrick
Charteris ride past; but he checked his spirit of repartee, and simply
said:

"Sir Patrick Charteris has been provost of Perth for seven years, and it
is likely is so still, since the magistrates are elected, not in Lent,
but at St."Ah, father Glover," said the youth, in his kinder and more familiar
mode of address, "you are so used to see the sumptuous shows and
pageants of Perth, that you would but little relish our barbarous
festival in comparison.What didst thou think of our ceremonial of
yesterday?""It was noble and touching," said the glover; "and to me, who knew your
father, most especially so.When you rested on the sword and looked
around you, methought I saw mine old friend Gilchrist MacIan arisen from
the dead and renewed in years and in strength.""I played my part there boldly, I trust; and showed little of that
paltry apprentice boy whom you used to--use just as he deserved?""Eachin resembles Conachar," said the glover, "no more than a salmon
resembles a gar, though men say they are the same fish in a different
state, or than a butterfly resembles a grub.""Thinkest thou that, while I was taking upon me the power which all
women love, I would have been myself an object for a maiden's eye to
rest upon?To speak plain, what would Catharine have thought of me in
the ceremonial?""We approach the shallows now," thought Simon Glover, "and without nice
pilotage we drive right on shore.""Most women like show, Eachin; but I think my daughter Catharine be an
exception.She would rejoice in the good fortune of her household friend
and playmate; but she would not value the splendid MacIan, captain of
Clan Quhele, more than the orphan Conachar.""She is ever generous and disinterested," replied the young chief."But
yourself, father, have seen the world for many more years than she has
done, and can better form a judgment what power and wealth do for those
who enjoy them.Think, and speak sincerely, what would be your own
thoughts if you saw your Catharine standing under yonder canopy, with
the command over an hundred hills, and the devoted obedience of ten
thousand vassals; and as the price of these advantages, her hand in that
of the man who loves her the best in the world?""Meaning in your own, Conachar?""Ay, Conachar call me: I love the name, since it was by that I have been
known to Catharine.""Sincerely, then," said the glover, endeavouring to give the least
offensive turn to his reply, "my inmost thought would be the earnest
wish that Catharine and I were safe in our humble booth in Curfew
Street, with Dorothy for our only vassal.""And with poor Conachar also, I trust?You would not leave him to pine
away in solitary grandeur?""I would not," answered the glover, "wish so ill to the Clan Quhele,
mine ancient friends, as to deprive them, at the moment of emergency,
of a brave young chief, and that chief of the fame which he is about to
acquire at their head in the approaching conflict."Eachin bit his lip to suppress his irritated feelings as he replied:
"Words--words--empty words, father Simon.You fear the Clan Quhele
more than you love them, and you suppose their indignation would be
formidable should their chief marry the daughter of a burgess of Perth.""And if I do fear such an issue, Hector MacIan, have I not reason?How
have ill assorted marriages had issue in the house of MacCallanmore,
in that of the powerful MacLeans--nay, of the Lords of the Isles
themselves?What has ever come of them but divorce and exheredation,
sometimes worse fate, to the ambitious intruder?You could not marry my
child before a priest, and you could only wed her with your left
hand; and I--" he checked the strain of impetuosity which the subject
inspired, and concluded, "and I am an honest though humble burgher of
Perth, who would rather my child were the lawful and undoubted spouse of
a citizen in my own rank than the licensed concubine of a monarch.""I will wed Catharine before the priest and before the world, before
the altar and before the black stones of Iona," said the impetuous young
man."She is the love of my youth, and there is not a tie in religion or
honour but I will bind myself by them!If
we do but win this combat--and, with the hope of gaining Catharine, we
SHALL win it--my heart tells me so--I shall be so much lord over their
affections that, were I to take a bride from the almshouse, so it was
my pleasure, they would hail her as if she were a daughter of
MacCallanmore."You put words of offence in my mouth," said the old man, "and may next
punish me for them, since I am wholly in your power.But with my consent
my daughter shall never wed save in her own degree.Her heart would
break amid the constant wars and scenes of bloodshed which connect
themselves with your lot.If you really love her, and recollect her
dread of strife and combat, you would not wish her to be subjected to
the train of military horrors in which you, like your father, must
needs be inevitably and eternally engaged.Choose a bride amongst the
daughters of the mountain chiefs, my son, or fiery Lowland nobles.You
are fair, young, rich, high born, and powerful, and will not woo in
vain.You will readily find one who will rejoice in your conquests, and
cheer you under defeat.To Catharine, the one would be as frightful
as the other.A warrior must wear a steel gauntlet: a glove of kidskin
would be torn to pieces in an hour."A dark cloud passed over the face of the young chief, lately animated
with so much fire."Farewell," he said, "the only hope which could have lighted me to fame
or victory!"He remained for a space silent, and intensely thoughtful, with downcast
eyes, a lowering brow, and folded arms.At length he raised his hands,
and said: "Father,--for such you have been to me--I am about to tell you
a secret.Reason and pride both advise me to be silent, but fate urges
me, and must be obeyed.I am about to lodge in you the deepest and
dearest secret that man ever confided to man.But beware--end this
conference how it will--beware how you ever breathe a syllable of what
I am now to trust to you; for know that, were you to do so in the most
remote corner of Scotland, I have ears to hear it even there, and a
hand and poniard to reach a traitor's bosom.I am--but the word will not
out!""Do not speak it then," said the prudent glover: "a secret is no longer
safe when it crosses the lips of him who owns it, and I desire not a
confidence so dangerous as you menace me with.""Ay, but I must speak, and you must hear," said the youth."In this age
of battle, father, you have yourself been a combatant?""Once only," replied Simon, "when the Southron assaulted the Fair City.I was summoned to take my part in the defence, as my tenure required,
like that of other craftsmen, who are bound to keep watch and ward.""What can that import to the present business?""Much, else I had not asked the question," answered.Eachin, in the tone
of haughtiness which from time to time he assumed."An old man is easily brought to speak of olden times," said Simon, not
unwilling, on an instant's reflection, to lead the conversation away
from the subject of his daughter, "and I must needs confess my feelings
were much short of the high, cheerful confidence, nay, the pleasure,
with which I have seen other men go to battle.My life and profession
were peaceful, and though I have not wanted the spirit of a man, when
the time demanded it, yet I have seldom slept worse than the night
before that onslaught.My ideas were harrowed by the tales we were
told--nothing short of the truth--about the Saxon archers: how they drew
shafts of a cloth yard length, and used bows a third longer than ours.When I fell into a broken slumber, if but a straw in the mattress
pricked my side I started and waked, thinking an English arrow was
quivering in my body.In the morning, as I began for very weariness to
sink into some repose, I was waked by the tolling of the common bell,
which called us burghers to the walls; I never heard its sound peal so
like a passing knell before or since.""I did on my harness," said Simon, "such as it was; took my mother's
blessing, a high spirited woman, who spoke of my father's actions for
the honour of the Fair Town.This heartened me, and I felt still bolder
when I found myself ranked among the other crafts, all bowmen, for thou
knowest the Perth citizens have good skill in archery.We were dispersed
on the walls, several knights and squires in armour of proof being
mingled amongst us, who kept a bold countenance, confident perhaps in
their harness, and informed us, for our encouragement, that they would
cut down with their swords and axes any of those who should attempt to
quit their post.I was kindly assured of this myself by the old Kempe
of Kinfauns, as he was called, this good Sir Patrick's father, then our
provost.He was a grandson of the Red Rover, Tom of Longueville, and
a likely man to keep his word, which he addressed to me in especial,
because a night of much discomfort may have made me look paler than
usual; and, besides, I was but a lad.""And did his exhortation add to your fear or your resolution?"said
Eachin, who seemed very attentive."To my resolution," answered Simon; "for I think nothing can make a
man so bold to face one danger at some distance in his front as the
knowledge of another close behind him, to push him forward.Well, I
mounted the walls in tolerable heart, and was placed with others on the
Spey Tower, being accounted a good bowman.But a very cold fit seized me
as I saw the English, in great order, with their archers in front,
and their men at arms behind, marching forward to the attack in strong
columns, three in number.They came on steadily, and some of us would
fain have shot at them; but it was strictly forbidden, and we were
obliged to remain motionless, sheltering ourselves behind the battlement
as we best might.As the Southron formed their long ranks into lines,
each man occupying his place as by magic, and preparing to cover
themselves by large shields, called pavesses, which they planted before
them, I again felt a strange breathlessness, and some desire to go home
for a glass of distilled waters.But as I looked aside, I saw the worthy
Kempe of Kinfauns bending a large crossbow, and I thought it pity he
should waste the bolt on a true hearted Scotsman, when so many English
were in presence; so I e'en staid where I was, being in a comfortable
angle, formed by two battlements.The English then strode forward, and
drew their bowstrings--not to the breast, as your Highland kerne do, but
to the ear--and sent off their volleys of swallow tails before we could
call on St.I winked when I saw them haul up their tackle, and I
believe I started as the shafts began to rattle against the parapet.But looking round me, and seeing none hurt but John Squallit, the town
crier, whose jaws were pierced through with a cloth yard shaft, I took
heart of grace, and shot in my turn with good will and good aim.A
little man I shot at, who had just peeped out from behind his target,
dropt with a shaft through his shoulder.The provost cried, 'Well
stitched, Simon Glover!'John, for his own town, my fellow
craftsmen!'shouted I, though I was then but an apprentice.And if you
will believe me, in the rest of the skirmish, which was ended by the
foes drawing off, I drew bowstring and loosed shaft as calmly as if
I had been shooting at butts instead of men's breasts.I gained
some credit, and I have ever afterwards thought that, in case of
necessity--for with me it had never been matter of choice--I should not
have lost it again.And this is all I can tell of warlike experience in
battle.Other dangers I have had, which I have endeavoured to avoid like
a wise man, or, when they were inevitable, I have faced them like a
true one.Upon other terms a man cannot live or hold up his head in
Scotland.""I understand your tale," said Eachin; "but I shall find it difficult
to make you credit mine, knowing the race of which I am descended, and
especially that I am the son of him whom we have this day laid in the
tomb--well that he lies where he will never learn what you are now to
hear!Look, my father, the light which I bear grows short and pale, a
few minutes will extinguish it; but before it expires, the hideous tale
will be told.Father, I am--a COWARD!It is said at last, and the secret
of my disgrace is in keeping of another!"The young man sunk back in a species of syncope, produced by the agony
of his mind as he made the fatal communication.The glover, moved as
well by fear as by compassion, applied himself to recall him to life,
and succeeded in doing so, but not in restoring him to composure.He hid
his face with his hands, and his tears flowed plentifully and bitterly."For Our Lady's sake, be composed," said the old man, "and recall the
vile word!I know you better than yourself: you are no coward, but only
too young and inexperienced, ay, and somewhat too quick of fancy, to
have the steady valour of a bearded man.I would hear no other man say
that of you, Conachar, without giving him the lie.You are no coward:
I have seen high sparks of spirit fly from you even on slight enough
provocation."said the unfortunate youth; "but
when saw you them supported by the resolution that should have backed
them?The sparks you speak of fell on my dastardly heart as on a piece
of ice which could catch fire from nothing: if my offended pride urged
me to strike, my weakness of mind prompted me the next moment to fly.""Want of habit," said Simon; "it is by clambering over walls that youths
learn to scale precipices.Begin with slight feuds; exercise daily the
arms of your country in tourney with your followers."exclaimed the young chief,
starting as if something horrid had occurred to his imagination."How
many days are there betwixt this hour and Palm Sunday, and what is to
chance then?A list inclosed, from which no man can stir, more than the
poor bear who is chained to his stake.Sixty living men, the best
and fiercest--one alone excepted!--which Albyn can send down from her
mountains, all athirst for each other's blood, while a king and his
nobles, and shouting thousands besides, attend, as at a theatre, to
encourage their demoniac fury!Blows clang and blood flows, thicker,
faster, redder; they rush on each other like madmen, they tear each
other like wild beasts; the wounded are trodden to death amid the feet
of their companions!Blood ebbs, arms become weak; but there must be
no parley, no truce, no interruption, while any of the maimed wretches
remain alive!Here is no crouching behind battlements, no fighting with
missile weapons: all is hand to hand, till hands can no longer be raised
to maintain the ghastly conflict!If such a field is so horrible in
idea, what think you it will be in reality?""I can only pity you, Conachar," said Simon."It is hard to be the
descendant of a lofty line--the son of a noble father--the leader by
birth of a gallant array, and yet to want, or think you want, for
still I trust the fault lies much in a quick fancy, that over estimates
danger--to want that dogged quality which is possessed by every game
cock that is worth a handful of corn, every hound that is worth a
mess of offal.But how chanced it that, with such a consciousness of
inability to fight in this battle, you proffered even now to share your
chiefdom with my daughter?Your power must depend on your fighting this
combat, and in that Catharine cannot help you.""You mistake, old man," replied Eachin: "were Catharine to look kindly
on the earnest love I bear her, it would carry me against the front of
the enemies with the mettle of a war horse.Overwhelming as my sense
of weakness is, the feeling that Catharine looked on would give me
strength.Say yet--oh, say yet--she shall be mine if we gain the combat,
and not the Gow Chrom himself, whose heart is of a piece with his
anvil, ever went to battle so light as I shall do!One strong passion is
conquered by another."Cannot the recollection of your interest, your
honour, your kindred, do as much to stir your courage as the thoughts of
a brent browed lass?"You tell me but what I have told myself, but it is in vain," replied
Eachin, with a sigh."It is only whilst the timid stag is paired with
the doe that he is desperate and dangerous.Be it from constitution; be
it, as our Highland cailliachs will say, from the milk of the white
doe; be it from my peaceful education and the experience of your strict
restraint; be it, as you think, from an overheated fancy, which paints
danger yet more dangerous and ghastly than it is in reality, I cannot
tell.But I know my failing, and--yes, it must be said!--so sorely dread
that I cannot conquer it, that, could I have your consent to my wishes
on such terms, I would even here make a pause, renounce the rank I have
assumed, and retire into humble life.""What, turn glover at last, Conachar?""This beats the
legend of St.Nay--nay, your hand was not framed for that: you
shall spoil me no more doe skins.""Jest not," said Eachin, "I am serious.If I cannot labour, I will bring
wealth enough to live without it.They will proclaim me recreant with
horn and war pipe.Catharine will love me the better
that I have preferred the paths of peace to those of bloodshed, and
Father Clement shall teach us to pity and forgive the world, which will
load us with reproaches that wound not.I shall be the happiest of men;
Catharine will enjoy all that unbounded affection can confer upon her,
and will be freed from apprehension of the sights and sounds of horror
which your ill assorted match would have prepared for her; and you,
father Glover, shall occupy your chimney corner, the happiest and most
honoured man that ever--"

"Hold, Eachin--I prithee, hold," said the glover; "the fir light, with
which this discourse must terminate, burns very low, and I would speak
a word in my turn, and plain dealing is best.Though it may vex,
or perhaps enrage, you, let me end these visions by saying at once:
Catharine can never be yours.A glove is the emblem of faith, and a
man of my craft should therefore less than any other break his own.Catharine's hand is promised--promised to a man whom you may hate, but
whom you must honour--to Henry the armourer.The match is fitting by
degree, agreeable to their mutual wishes, and I have given my promise.It is best to be plain at once; resent my refusal as you will--I am
wholly in your power.The glover spoke thus decidedly, because he was aware from experience
that the very irritable disposition of his former apprentice yielded in
most cases to stern and decided resolution.Yet, recollecting where he
was, it was with some feelings of fear that he saw the dying flame leap
up and spread a flash of light on the visage of Eachin, which seemed
pale as the grave, while his eye rolled like that of a maniac in his
fever fit.The light instantly sunk down and died, and Simon felt a
momentary terror lest he should have to dispute for his life with
the youth, whom he knew to be capable of violent actions when highly
excited, however short a period his nature could support the measures
which his passion commenced.He was relieved by the voice of Eachin, who
muttered in a hoarse and altered tone:

"Let what we have spoken this night rest in silence for ever.If thou
bring'st it to light, thou wert better dig thine own grave."Thus speaking, the door of the hut opened, admitting a gleam of
moonshine.The form of the retiring chief crossed it for an instant, the
hurdle was then closed, and the shieling left in darkness.Simon Glover felt relieved when a conversation fraught with offence and
danger was thus peaceably terminated.But he remained deeply affected by
the condition of Hector MacIan, whom he had himself bred up."The poor child," said he, "to be called up to a place of eminence,
only to be hurled from it with contempt!What he told me I partly knew,
having often remarked that Conachar was more prone to quarrel than to
fight.But this overpowering faint heartedness, which neither shame
nor necessity can overcome, I, though no Sir William Wallace, cannot
conceive.And to propose himself for a husband to my daughter, as if
a bride were to find courage for herself and the bridegroom!No--no,
Catharine must wed a man to whom she may say, 'Husband, spare your
enemy'--not one in whose behalf she must cry, 'Generous enemy, spare my
husband!"Tired out with these reflections, the old man at length fell asleep.In the morning he was awakened by his friend the Booshalloch, who, with
something of a blank visage, proposed to him to return to his abode on
the meadow at the Ballough.He apologised that the chief could not see
Simon Glover that morning, being busied with things about the expected
combat; and that Eachin MacIan thought the residence at the Ballough
would be safest for Simon Glover's health, and had given charge that
every care should be taken for his protection and accommodation.Niel Booshalloch dilated on these circumstances, to gloss over the
neglect implied in the chief's dismissing his visitor without a
particular audience."His father knew better," said the herdsman."But where should he have
learned manners, poor thing, and bred up among your Perth burghers, who,
excepting yourself, neighbour Glover, who speak Gaelic as well as I do,
are a race incapable of civility?"Simon Glover, it may be well believed, felt none of the want of respect
which his friend resented on his account.On the contrary, he greatly
preferred the quiet residence of the good herdsman to the tumultuous
hospitality of the daily festival of the chief, even if there had not
just passed an interview with Eachin upon a subject which it would be
most painful to revive.To the Ballough, therefore, he quietly retreated, where, could he have
been secure of Catharine's safety, his leisure was spent pleasantly
enough.His amusement was sailing on the lake in a little skiff, which a
Highland boy managed, while the old man angled.He frequently landed
on the little island, where he mused over the tomb of his old friend
Gilchrist MacIan, and made friends with the monks, presenting the prior
with gloves of martens' fur, and the superior officers with each of them
a pair made from the skin of the wildcat.The cutting and stitching of
these little presents served to beguile the time after sunset, while
the family of the herdsman crowded around, admiring his address, and
listening to the tales and songs with which the old man had skill to
pass away a heavy evening.It must be confessed that the cautious glover avoided the conversation
of Father Clement, whom he erroneously considered as rather the author
of his misfortunes than the guiltless sharer of them."I will not," he
thought, "to please his fancies, lose the goodwill of these kind
monks, which may be one day useful to me.I have suffered enough by his
preachments already, I trow.Little the wiser and much the poorer they
have made me.No--no, Catharine and Clement may think as they will; but
I will take the first opportunity to sneak back like a rated hound at
the call of his master, submit to a plentiful course of haircloth and
whipcord, disburse a lusty mulct, and become whole with the church
again."More than a fortnight had passed since the glover had arrived at
Ballough, and he began to wonder that he had not heard news of Catharine
or of Henry Wynd, to whom he concluded the provost had communicated the
plan and place of his retreat.He knew the stout smith dared not come
up into the Clan Quhele country, on account of various feuds with
the inhabitants, and with Eachin himself, while bearing the name of
Conachar; but yet the glover thought Henry might have found means to
send him a message, or a token, by some one of the various couriers who
passed and repassed between the court and the headquarters of the Clan
Quhele, in order to concert the terms of the impending combat, the
march of the parties to Perth, and other particulars requiring previous
adjustment.It was now the middle of March, and the fatal Palm Sunday
was fast approaching.Whilst time was thus creeping on, the exiled glover had not even once
set eyes upon his former apprentice.The care that was taken to attend
to his wants and convenience in every respect showed that he was not
forgotten; but yet, when he heard the chieftain's horn ringing through
the woods, he usually made it a point to choose his walk in a different
direction.One morning, however, he found himself unexpectedly in
Eachin's close neighbourhood, with scarce leisure to avoid him, and thus
it happened.As Simon strolled pensively through a little silvan glade, surrounded
on either side with tall forest trees, mixed with underwood, a white doe
broke from the thicket, closely pursued by two deer greyhounds, one
of which griped her haunch, the other her throat, and pulled her down
within half a furlong of the glover, who was something startled at the
suddenness of the incident.The ear and piercing blast of a horn, and
the baying of a slow hound, made Simon aware that the hunters were close
behind, and on the trace of the deer.Hallooing and the sound of
men running through the copse were heard close at hand.A moment's
recollection would have satisfied Simon that his best way was to stand
fast, or retire slowly, and leave it to Eachin to acknowledge his
presence or not, as he should see cause.But his desire of shunning the
young man had grown into a kind of instinct, and in the alarm of finding
him so near, Simon hid himself in a bush of hazels mixed with holly,
which altogether concealed him.He had hardly done so ere Eachin, rosy
with exercise, dashed from the thicket into the open glade, accompanied
by his foster father, Torquil of the Oak.The latter, with equal
strength and address, turned the struggling hind on her back, and
holding her forefeet in his right hand, while he knelt on her body,
offered his skene with the left to the young chief, that he might cut
the animal's throat."It may not be, Torquil; do thine office, and take the assay thyself.I
must not kill the likeness of my foster--"

This was spoken with a melancholy smile, while a tear at the same time
stood in the speaker's eye.Torquil stared at his young chief for an
instant, then drew his sharp wood knife across the creature's throat
with a cut so swift and steady that the weapon reached the backbone.Then rising on his feet, and again fixing a long piercing look on his
chief, he said: "As much as I have done to that hind would I do to any
living man whose ears could have heard my dault (foster son) so much as
name a white doe, and couple the word with Hector's name!"If Simon had no reason before to keep himself concealed, this speech of
Torquil furnished him with a pressing one."It cannot be concealed, father Torquil," said Eachin: "it will all out
to the broad day.""It is the fatal secret," thought Simon; "and now, if this huge privy
councillor cannot keep silence, I shall be made answerable, I suppose,
for Eachin's disgrace having been blown abroad."Thinking thus anxiously, he availed himself at the same time of his
position to see as much as he could of what passed between the afflicted
chieftain and his confidant, impelled by that spirit of curiosity which
prompts us in the most momentous, as well as the most trivial, occasions
of life, and which is sometimes found to exist in company with great
personal fear.As Torquil listened to what Eachin communicated, the young man sank
into his arms, and, supporting himself on his shoulder, concluded his
confession by a whisper into his ear.Torquil seemed to listen with such
amazement as to make him incapable of crediting his ears.As if to be
certain that it was Eachin who spoke, he gradually roused the youth from
his reclining posture, and, holding him up in some measure by a grasp on
his shoulder, fixed on him an eye that seemed enlarged, and at the same
time turned to stone, by the marvels he listened to.And so wild waxed
the old man's visage after he had heard the murmured communication,
that Simon Glover apprehended he would cast the youth from him as a
dishonoured thing, in which case he might have lighted among the very
copse in which he lay concealed, and occasioned his discovery in a
manner equally painful and dangerous.But the passions of Torquil,
who entertained for his foster child even a double portion of that
passionate fondness which always attends that connexion in the Highlands
took a different turn."I believe it not," he exclaimed; "it is false of thy father's child,
false of thy mother's son, falsest of my dault!I offer my gage to
heaven and hell, and will maintain the combat with him that shall call
it true.Thou hast been spellbound by an evil eye, my darling, and the
fainting which you call cowardice is the work of magic.I remember the
bat that struck the torch out on the hour that thou wert born--that hour
of grief and of joy.Thou shalt with me to Iona,
and the good St.Columbus, with the whole choir of blessed saints and
angels, who ever favoured thy race, shall take from thee the heart of
the white doe and return that which they have stolen from thee."Eachin listened, with a look as if he would fain have believed the words
of the comforter."But, Torquil," he said, "supposing this might avail us, the fatal day
approaches, and if I go to the lists, I dread me we shall be shamed.""Hell shall not prevail so
far: we will steep thy sword in holy water, place vervain, St.John's
Wort, and rowan tree in thy crest.We will surround thee, I and thy
eight brethren: thou shalt be safe as in a castle."Again the youth helplessly uttered something, which, from the dejected
tone in which it was spoken, Simon could not understand, while Torquil's
deep tones in reply fell full and distinct upon his ear."Yes, there may be a chance of withdrawing thee from the conflict.Thou
art the youngest who is to draw blade.Now, hear me, and thou shalt know
what it is to have a foster father's love, and how far it exceeds the
love even of kinsmen.The youngest on the indenture of the Clan Chattan
is Ferquhard Day.His father slew mine, and the red blood is seething
hot between us; I looked to Palm Sunday as the term that should cool it.Thou wouldst have thought that the blood in the veins of this
Ferquhard Day and in mine would not have mingled had they been put into
the same vessel, yet hath he cast the eyes of his love upon my only
daughter Eva, the fairest of our maidens.Think with what feelings I
heard the news.It was as if a wolf from the skirts of Farragon had
said, 'Give me thy child in wedlock, Torquil.'My child thought not
thus: she loves Ferquhard, and weeps away her colour and strength in
dread of the approaching battle.Let her give him but a sign of favour,
and well I know he will forget kith and kin, forsake the field, and fly
with her to the desert.""He, the youngest of the champions of Clan Chattan, being absent, I, the
youngest of the Clan Quhele, may be excused from combat" said Eachin,
blushing at the mean chance of safety thus opened to him."See now, my chief;" said Torquil, "and judge my thoughts towards
thee: others might give thee their own lives and that of their sons--I
sacrifice to thee the honour of my house.""My friend--my father," repeated the chief, folding Torquil to his
bosom, "what a base wretch am I that have a spirit dastardly enough to
avail myself of your sacrifice!"Let us back to the camp, and
send our gillies for the venison.The slowhound, or lyme dog, luckily for Simon, had drenched his nose in
the blood of the deer, else he might have found the glover's lair in the
thicket; but its more acute properties of scent being lost, it followed
tranquilly with the gazehounds.When the hunters were out of sight and hearing, the glover arose,
greatly relieved by their departure, and began to move off in the
opposite direction as fast as his age permitted.His first reflection
was on the fidelity of the foster father."The wild mountain heart is faithful and true.Yonder man is more like
the giants in romaunts than a man of mould like ourselves; and yet
Christians might take an example from him for his lealty.A simple
contrivance this, though, to finger a man from off their enemies'
chequer, as if there would not be twenty of the wildcats ready to supply
his place."Thus thought the glover, not aware that the strictest proclamations
were issued, prohibiting any of the two contending clans, their friends,
allies, and dependants, from coming within fifty miles of Perth, during
a week before and a week after the combat, which regulation was to be
enforced by armed men.So soon as our friend Simon arrived at the habitation of the herdsman,
he found other news awaiting him.They were brought by Father Clement,
who came in a pilgrim's cloak, or dalmatic, ready to commence his return
to the southward, and desirous to take leave of his companion in exile,
or to accept him as a travelling companion."But what," said the citizen, "has so suddenly induced you to return
within the reach of danger?""Have you not heard," said Father Clement, "that, March and his English
allies having retired into England before the Earl of Douglas, the good
earl has applied himself to redress the evils of the commonwealth, and
hath written to the court letters desiring that the warrant for the High
Court of Commission against heresy be withdrawn, as a trouble to men's
consciences, that the nomination of Henry of Wardlaw to be prelate of
St.Andrews be referred to the Parliament, with sundry other things
pleasing to the Commons?Now, most of the nobles that are with the King
at Perth, and with them Sir Patrick Charteris, your worthy provost, have
declared for the proposals of the Douglas.The Duke of Albany had agreed
to them--whether from goodwill or policy I know not.The good King is
easily persuaded to mild and gentle courses.And thus are the jaw
teeth of the oppressors dashed to pieces in their sockets, and the prey
snatched from their ravening talons.Will you with me to the Lowlands,
or do you abide here a little space?"Neil Booshalloch saved his friend the trouble of reply."He had the chief's authority," he said, "for saying that Simon Glover
should abide until the champions went down to the battle."In this answer the citizen saw something not quite consistent with his
own perfect freedom of volition; but he cared little for it at the
time, as it furnished a good apology for not travelling along with the
clergyman."An exemplary man," he said to his friend Niel Booshalloch, as soon as
Father Clement had taken leave--"a great scholar and a great saint.It
is a pity almost he is no longer in danger to be burned, as his sermon
at the stake would convert thousands.O Niel Booshalloch, Father
Clement's pile would be a sweet savouring sacrifice and a beacon to
all decent Christians!But what would the burning of a borrel ignorant
burgess like me serve?Men offer not up old glove leather for incense,
nor are beacons fed with undressed hides, I trow.Sooth to speak, I have
too little learning and too much fear to get credit by the affair, and,
therefore, I should, in our homely phrase, have both the scathe and the
scorn.""True for you," answered the herdsman.We must return to the characters of our dramatic narrative whom we
     left at Perth, when we accompanied the glover and his fair daughter
     to Kinfauns, and from that hospitable mansion traced the course of
     Simon to Loch Tay; and the Prince, as the highest personage, claims
     our immediate attention.This rash and inconsiderate young man endured with some impatience his
sequestered residence with the Lord High Constable, with whose company,
otherwise in every respect satisfactory, he became dissatisfied, from
no other reason than that he held in some degree the character of his
warder.Incensed against his uncle and displeased with his father, he
longed, not unnaturally, for the society of Sir John Ramorny, on whom he
had been so long accustomed to throw himself for amusement, and, though
he would have resented the imputation as an insult, for guidance and
direction.He therefore sent him a summons to attend him, providing his
health permitted; and directed him to come by water to a little pavilion
in the High Constable's garden, which, like that of Sir John's own
lodgings, ran down to the Tay.In renewing an intimacy so dangerous,
Rothsay only remembered that he had been Sir Join Ramorny's munificent
friend; while Sir John, on receiving the invitation, only recollected,
on his part, the capricious insults he had sustained from his patron,
the loss of his hand, and the lightness with which he had treated the
subject, and the readiness with which Rothsay had abandoned his cause in
the matter of the bonnet maker's slaughter.He laughed bitterly when he
read the Prince's billet."Eviot," he said, "man a stout boat with six trusty men--trusty men,
mark me--lose not a moment, and bid Dwining instantly come hither."Heaven smiles on us, my trusty friend," he said to the mediciner."I
was but beating my brains how to get access to this fickle boy, and here
he sends to invite me."I see the matter very clearly," said Dwining."Heaven smiles on
some untoward consequences--he!"No matter, the trap is ready; and it is baited, too, my friend, with
what would lure the boy from a sanctuary, though a troop with drawn
weapons waited him in the churchyard.His own weariness of himself would have done the job.Get thy matters
ready--thou goest with us.Write to him, as I cannot, that we come
instantly to attend his commands, and do it clerkly.He reads well, and
that he owes to me.""He will be your valiancie's debtor for more knowledge before he
dies--he!But is your bargain sure with the Duke of Albany?""Enough to gratify my ambition, thy avarice, and the revenge of both.Aboard--aboard, and speedily; let Eviot throw in a few flasks of the
choicest wine, and some cold baked meats.""But your arm, my lord, Sir John?"The throbbing of my heart silences the pain of my wound.It beats as it
would burst my bosom."said Dwining; adding, in a low voice--"It would be a
strange sight if it should.I should like to dissect it, save that its
stony case would spoil my best instruments."In a few minutes they were in the boat, while a speedy messenger carried
the note to the Prince.Rothsay was seated with the Constable, after their noontide repast.He
was sullen and silent; and the earl had just asked whether it was his
pleasure that the table should be cleared, when a note, delivered to the
Prince, changed at once his aspect."I go to the pavilion in the garden--always
with permission of my Lord Constable--to receive my late master of the
horse.""Ay, my lord; must I ask permission twice?""No, surely, my lord," answered the Constable; "but has your Royal
Highness recollected that Sir John Ramorny--"

"Has not the plague, I hope?""Come, Errol,
you would play the surly turnkey, but it is not in your nature; farewell
for half an hour."said Errol, as the Prince, flinging open a lattice of
the ground parlour in which they sat, stept out into the garden--"a new
folly, to call back that villain to his counsels.The Prince, in the mean time, looked back, and said hastily:

"Your lordship's good housekeeping will afford us a flask or two of
wine and a slight collation in the pavilion?I love the al fresco of the
river."The Constable bowed, and gave the necessary orders; so that Sir John
found the materials of good cheer ready displayed, when, landing from
his barge, he entered the pavilion."It grieves my heart to see your Highness under restraint," said
Ramorny, with a well executed appearance of sympathy."That grief of thine will grieve mine," said the Prince."I am sure here
has Errol, and a right true hearted lord he is, so tired me with grave
looks, and something like grave lessons, that he has driven me back to
thee, thou reprobate, from whom, as I expect nothing good, I may perhaps
obtain something entertaining.Yet, ere we say more, it was foul work,
that upon the Fastern's Even, Ramorny.I well hope thou gavest not aim
to it.""On my honour, my lord, a simple mistake of the brute Bonthron.I did
hint to him that a dry beating would be due to the fellow by whom I had
lost a hand; and lo you, my knave makes a double mistake.He takes one
man for another, and instead of the baton he uses the axe.""It is well that it went no farther.Small matter for the bonnet maker;
but I had never forgiven you had the armourer fallen--there is not his
match in Britain.But I hope they hanged the villain high enough?""If thirty feet might serve," replied Ramorny.no more of him," said Rothsay; "his wretched name makes the good
wine taste of blood.And what are the news in Perth, Ramorny?How stands
it with the bona robas and the galliards?""Little galliardise stirring, my lord," answered the knight."All eyes
are turned to the motions of the Black Douglas, who comes with five
thousand chosen men to put us all to rights, as if he were bound for
another Otterburn.It is said he is to be lieutenant again.It is
certain many have declared for his faction.""It is time, then, my feet were free," said Rothsay, "otherwise I may
find a worse warder than Errol."were you once away from this place, you might make as bold
a head as Douglas.""Ramorny," said the Prince, gravely, "I have but a confused remembrance
of your once having proposed something horrible to me.I would be free--I would have my person at my own disposal; but
I will never levy arms against my father, nor those it pleases him to
trust.""It was only for your Royal Highness's personal freedom that I was
presuming to speak," answered Ramorny."Were I in your Grace's place,
I would get me into that good boat which hovers on the Tay, and drop
quietly down to Fife, where you have many friends, and make free to take
possession of Falkland.It is a royal castle; and though the King has
bestowed it in gift on your uncle, yet surely, even if the grant were
not subject to challenge, your Grace might make free with the residence
of so near a relative.""He hath made free with mine," said the Duke, "as the stewartry of
Renfrew can tell.But stay, Ramorny--hold; did I not hear Errol say
that the Lady Marjory Douglas, whom they call Duchess of Rothsay, is
at Falkland?I would neither dwell with that lady nor insult her by
dislodging her.""The lady was there, my lord," replied Ramorny; "I have sure advice that
she is gone to meet her father."or perhaps to beg him to spare
me, providing I come on my knees to her bed, as pilgrims say the emirs
and amirals upon whom a Saracen soldan bestows a daughter in marriage
are bound to do?Ramorny, I will act by the Douglas's own saying, 'It
is better to hear the lark sing than the mouse squeak.'I will keep both
foot and hand from fetters.""No place fitter than Falkland," replied Ramorny."I have enough of good
yeomen to keep the place; and should your Highness wish to leave it, a
brief ride reaches the sea in three directions."Neither mirth, music,
nor maidens--ha!""Pardon me, noble Duke; but, though the Lady Marjory Douglas be
departed, like an errant dame in romance, to implore succour of her
doughty sire, there is, I may say, a lovelier, I am sure a younger,
maiden, either presently at Falkland or who will soon be on the road
thither.Your Highness has not forgotten the Fair Maid of Perth?""Forget the prettiest wench in Scotland!No--any more than thou hast
forgotten the hand that thou hadst in the Curfew Street onslaught on St.Your Highness would say, the hand that I lost.As
certain as I shall never regain it, Catharine Glover is, or will soon
be, at Falkland.I will not flatter your Highness by saying she
expects to meet you; in truth, she proposes to place herself under the
protection of the Lady Marjory.""The little traitress," said the Prince--"she too to turn against me?"I trust your Grace will make her penance a gentle one," replied the
knight."Faith, I would have been her father confessor long ago, but I have ever
found her coy.""Opportunity was lacking, my lord," replied Ramorny; "and time presses
even now.""Nay, I am but too apt for a frolic; but my father--"

"He is personally safe," said Ramorny, "and as much at freedom as ever
he can be; while your Highness--"

"Must brook fetters, conjugal or literal--I know it.Yonder comes
Douglas, with his daughter in his hand, as haughty and as harsh featured
as himself, bating touches of age.""And at Falkland sits in solitude the fairest wench in Scotland," said
Ramorny."Here is penance and restraint, yonder is joy and freedom.""Thou hast prevailed, most sage counsellor," replied Rothsay; "but mark
you, it shall be the last of my frolics.""I trust so," replied Ramorny; "for, when at liberty, you may make a
good accommodation with your royal father.""I will write to him, Ramorny.No, I cannot
put my thoughts in words--do thou write.""Your Royal Highness forgets," said Ramorny, pointing to his mutilated
arm."So please your Highness," answered his counsellor, "if you would use
the hand of the mediciner, Dwining--he writes like a clerk.""Hath he a hint of the circumstances?"Fully," said Ramorny; and, stepping to the window, he called Dwining
from the boat.He entered the presence of the Prince of Scotland, creeping as if he
trode upon eggs, with downcast eyes, and a frame that seemed shrunk up
by a sense of awe produced by the occasion.I will make trial of you; thou
know'st the case--place my conduct to my father in a fair light."Dwining sat down, and in a few minutes wrote a letter, which he handed
to Sir John Ramorny."Why, the devil has aided thee, Dwining," said the knight.'Respected father and liege sovereign--Know that important
considerations induce me to take my departure from this your court,
purposing to make my abode at Falkland, both as the seat of my dearest
uncle Albany, with whom I know your Majesty would desire me to use all
familiarity, and as the residence of one from whom I have been too
long estranged, and with whom I haste to exchange vows of the closest
affection from henceforward.'"The Duke of Rothsay and Ramorny laughed aloud; and the physician,
who had listened to his own scroll as if it were a sentence of death,
encouraged by their applause, raised his eyes, uttered faintly his
chuckling note of "He!and was again grave and silent, as if afraid
he had transgressed the bounds of reverent respect.The old man will apply
all this to the Duchess, as they call her, of Rothsay.Dwining, thou
shouldst be a secretis to his Holiness the Pope, who sometimes, it is
said, wants a scribe that can make one word record two meanings.I will
subscribe it, and have the praise of the device.""And now, my lord," said Ramorny, sealing the letter and leaving it
behind, "will you not to boat?""Not till my chamberlain attends with some clothes and necessaries, and
you may call my sewer also.""My lord," said Ramorny, "time presses, and preparation will but excite
suspicion.Your officers will follow with the mails tomorrow.For
tonight, I trust my poor service may suffice to wait on you at table and
chamber.""Nay, this time it is thou who forgets," said the Prince, touching the
wounded arm with his walking rod."Recollect, man, thou canst neither
carve a capon nor tie a point--a goodly sewer or valet of the mouth!"Ramorny grinned with rage and pain; for his wound, though in a way of
healing, was still highly sensitive, and even the pointing a finger
towards it made him tremble."Will your Highness now be pleased to take boat?""Not till I take leave of the Lord Constable.Rothsay must not slip
away, like a thief from a prison, from the house of Errol."My Lord Duke," said Ramorny, "it may be dangerous to our plan.""To the devil with danger, thy plan, and thyself!I must and will act to
Errol as becomes us both."The earl entered, agreeable to the Prince's summons."I gave you this trouble, my lord," said Rothsay, with the dignified
courtesy which he knew so well how to assume, "to thank you for your
hospitality and your good company.I can enjoy them no longer, as
pressing affairs call me to Falkland.""My lord," said the Lord High Constable, "I trust your Grace remembers
that you are--under ward."If I am a prisoner, speak plainly; if not, I will
take my freedom to depart.""I would, my lord, your Highness would request his Majesty's permission
for this journey."Mean you displeasure against yourself, my lord, or against me?""I have already said your Highness lies in ward here; but if you
determine to break it, I have no warrant--God forbid--to put force on
your inclinations.I can but entreat your Highness, for your own sake--"

"Of my own interest I am the best judge.The wilful Prince stepped into the boat with Dwining and Ramorny, and,
waiting for no other attendance, Eviot pushed off the vessel, which
descended the Tay rapidly by the assistance of sail and oar and of the
ebb tide.For some space the Duke of Rothsay appeared silent and moody, nor did
his companions interrupt his reflections.He raised his head at length
and said: "My father loves a jest, and when all is over he will take
this frolic at no more serious rate than it deserves--a fit of youth,
with which he will deal as he has with others.Yonder, my masters, shows
the old hold of Kinfauns, frowning above the Tay.Now, tell me, John
Ramorny, how thou hast dealt to get the Fair Maid of Perth out of the
hands of yonder bull headed provost; for Errol told me it was rumoured
that she was under his protection.""Truly she was, my lord, with the purpose of being transferred to the
patronage of the Duchess--I mean of the Lady Marjory of Douglas.Now,
this beetle headed provost, who is after all but a piece of blundering
valiancy, has, like most such, a retainer of some slyness and cunning,
whom he uses in all his dealings, and whose suggestions he generally
considers as his own ideas.Whenever I would possess myself of a
landward baron, I address myself to such a confidant, who, in the
present case, is called Kitt Henshaw, an old skipper upon the Tay,
and who, having in his time sailed as far as Campvere, holds with Sir
Patrick Charteris the respect due to one who has seen foreign countries.This his agent I have made my own, and by his means have insinuated
various apologies in order to postpone the departure of Catharine for
Falkland.""I know not if it is wise to tell your Highness, lest you should
disapprove of my views.I meant the officers of the Commission for
inquiry into heretical opinions should have found the Fair Maid at
Kinfauns, for our beauty is a peevish, self willed swerver from the
church; and certes, I designed that the knight should have come in
for his share of the fines and confiscations that were about to be
inflicted.The monks were eager enough to be at him, seeing he hath had
frequent disputes with them about the salmon tithe.""But wherefore wouldst thou have ruined the knight's fortunes, and
brought the beautiful young woman to the stake, perchance?"An old woman
might have been in some danger; and as for my Lord Provost, as they call
him, if they had clipped off some of his fat acres, it would have
been some atonement for the needless brave he put on me in St."Methinks, John, it was but a base revenge," said Rothsay.He that cannot right himself by the hand
must use his head.Well, that chance was over by the tender hearted
Douglas's declaring in favour of tender conscience; and then, my lord,
old Henshaw found no further objections to carrying the Fair Maid
of Perth to Falkland, not to share the dulness of the Lady Marjory's
society, as Sir Patrick Charteris and she herself doth opine, but to
keep your Highness from tiring when we return from hunting in the park."There was again a long pause, in which the Prince seemed to muse deeply."Ramorny, I have a scruple in this matter; but if I
name it to thee, the devil of sophistry, with which thou art possessed,
will argue it out of me, as it has done many others.This girl is the
most beautiful, one excepted, whom I ever saw or knew; and I like her
the more that she bears some features of--Elizabeth of Dunbar.But she,
I mean Catharine Glover, is contracted, and presently to be wedded, to
Henry the armourer, a craftsman unequalled for skill, and a man at arms
yet unmatched in the barrace.To follow out this intrigue would do a
good fellow too much wrong.""Your Highness will not expect me to be very solicitous of Henry Smith's
interest," said Ramorny, looking at his wounded arm.Andrew with his shored cross, this disaster of thine is too much
harped upon, John Ramorny!Others are content with putting a finger
into every man's pie, but thou must thrust in thy whole gory hand.It is
done, and cannot be undone; let it be forgotten.""Nay, my lord, you allude to it more frequently than I," answered the
knight--"in derision, it is true; while I--but I can be silent on the
subject if I cannot forget it.""Well, then, I tell thee that I have scruple about this intrigue.Dost
thou remember, when we went in a frolic to hear Father Clement preach,
or rather to see this fair heretic, that he spoke as touchingly as a
minstrel about the rich man taking away the poor man's only ewe lamb?""A great matter, indeed," answered Sir John, "that this churl's wife's
eldest son should be fathered by the Prince of Scotland!How many earls
would covet the like fate for their fair countesses?and how many that
have had such good luck sleep not a grain the worse for it?""And if I might presume to speak," said the mediciner, "the ancient
laws of Scotland assigned such a privilege to every feudal lord over his
female vassals, though lack of spirit and love of money hath made many
exchange it for gold.""I require no argument to urge me to be kind to a pretty woman; but this
Catharine has been ever cold to me," said the Prince."Nay, my lord," said Ramorny, "if, young, handsome, and a prince, you
know not how to make yourself acceptable to a fine woman, it is not for
me to say more.""And if it were not far too great audacity in me to speak again, I would
say," quoth the leech, "that all Perth knows that the Gow Chrom never
was the maiden's choice, but fairly forced upon her by her father.I
know for certain that she refused him repeatedly.""Nay, if thou canst assure us of that, the case is much altered," said
Rothsay."Vulcan was a smith as well as Harry Wynd; he would needs wed
Venus, and our chronicles tell us what came of it.""Then long may Lady Venus live and be worshipped," said Sir John
Ramorny, "and success to the gallant knight Mars who goes a-wooing to
her goddess-ship!"The discourse took a gay and idle turn for a few minutes; but the Duke
of Rothsay soon dropped it."I have left," he said, "yonder air of the
prison house behind me, and yet my spirits scarce revive.I feel that
drowsy, not unpleasing, yet melancholy mood that comes over us when
exhausted by exercise or satiated with pleasure.Some music now,
stealing on the ear, yet not loud enough to make us lift the eye, were a
treat for the gods.""Your Grace has but to speak your wishes, and the nymphs of the Tay are
as favourable as the fair ones upon the shore.said the Duke of Rothsay, listening; "it is, and rarely
touched.Steer towards the boat from
whence the music comes.""It is old Henshaw," said Ramorny, "working up the stream.The boatman answered the hail, and drew up alongside of the Prince's
barge.said the Prince, recognising the figure as well
as the appointments of the French glee woman, Louise."I think I owe
thee something for being the means of thy having a fright, at least,
upon St.Into this boat with thee, lute, puppy dog,
scrip and all; I will prefer thee to a lady's service who shall feed thy
very cur on capons and canary.""I trust your Highness will consider--" said Ramorny."I will consider nothing but my pleasure, John.Pray, do thou be so
complying as to consider it also.""Is it indeed to a lady's service you would promote me?""Oh, I have heard of that great lady!"said Louise; "and will you indeed
prefer me to your right royal consort's service?""I will, by my honour--whenever I receive her as such.Mark that
reservation, John," said he aside to Ramorny.The persons who were in the boat caught up the tidings, and, concluding
a reconciliation was about to take place betwixt the royal couple,
exhorted Louise to profit by her good fortune, and add herself to the
Duchess of Rothsay's train.Several offered her some acknowledgment for
the exercise of her talents.During this moment of delay, Ramorny whispered to Dwining: "Make in,
knave, with some objection.Rouse thy
wits, while I speak a word with Henshaw.""If I might presume to speak," said Dwining, "as one who have made
my studies both in Spain and Arabia, I would say, my lord, that the
sickness has appeared in Edinburgh, and that there may be risk in
admitting this young wanderer into your Highness's vicinity."and what is it to thee," said Rothsay, "whether I choose to be
poisoned by the pestilence or the 'pothecary?Must thou, too, needs
thwart my humour?"While the Prince thus silenced the remonstrances of Dwining, Sir John
Ramorny had snatched a moment to learn from Henshaw that the removal of
the Duchess of Rothsay from Falkland was still kept profoundly secret,
and that Catharine Glover would arrive there that evening or the
next morning, in expectation of being taken under the noble lady's
protection.The Duke of Rothsay, deeply plunged in thought, received this intimation
so coldly, that Ramorny took the liberty of remonstrating."This, my
lord," he said, "is playing the spoiled child of fortune.You wish for
liberty; it comes.You wish for beauty; it awaits you, with just so much
delay as to render the boon more precious.Even your slightest desires
seem a law to the Fates; for you desire music when it seems most
distant, and the lute and song are at your hand.These things, so sent,
should be enjoyed, else we are but like petted children, who break and
throw from them the toys they have wept themselves sick for.""To enjoy pleasure, Ramorny," said the Prince, "a man should have
suffered pain, as it requires fasting to gain a good appetite.We, who
can have all for a wish, little enjoy that all when we have possessed
it.Seest thou yonder thick cloud, which is about to burst to rain?It
seems to stifle me--the waters look dark and lurid--the shores have lost
their beautiful form--"

"My lord, forgive your servant," said Ramorny."You indulge a powerful
imagination, as an unskilful horseman permits a fiery steed to rear
until he falls back on his master and crushes him.I pray you shake off
this lethargy.Shall the glee maiden make some music?""Let her; but it must be melancholy: all mirth would at this moment jar
on my ear."The maiden sung a melancholy dirge in Norman French; the words, of which
the following is an imitation, were united to a tune as doleful as they
are themselves:

     Yes, thou mayst sigh,
     And look once more at all around,
     At stream and bank, and sky and ground.Thy life its final course has found,
     And thou must die.Yes, lay thee down,
     And while thy struggling pulses flutter,
     Bid the grey monk his soul mass mutter,
     And the deep bell its death tone utter--
     Thy life is gone.'Tis but a pang, and then a thrill,
     A fever fit, and then a chill,
     And then an end of human ill,
     For thou art dead.The Prince made no observation on the music; and the maiden, at
Ramorny's beck, went on from time to time with her minstrel craft, until
the evening sunk down into rain, first soft and gentle, at length in
great quantities, and accompanied by a cold wind.There was neither
cloak nor covering for the Prince, and he sullenly rejected that which
Ramorny offered."It is not for Rothsay to wear your cast garments, Sir John; this melted
snow, which I feel pierce me to the very marrow, I am now encountering
by your fault.Why did you presume to put off the boat without my
servants and apparel?"Ramorny did not attempt an exculpation; for he knew the Prince was in
one of those humours, when to enlarge upon a grievance was more pleasing
to him than to have his mouth stopped by any reasonable apology.In
sullen silence, or amid unsuppressed chiding, the boat arrived at the
fishing village of Newburgh.The party landed, and found horses in
readiness, which, indeed, Ramorny had long since provided for the
occasion.Their quality underwent the Prince's bitter sarcasm, expressed
to Ramorny sometimes by direct words, oftener by bitter gibes.At length
they were mounted and rode on through the closing night and the falling
rain, the Prince leading the way with reckless haste.The glee maiden,
mounted by his express order, attended them and well for her that,
accustomed to severe weather, and exercise both on foot and horseback,
she supported as firmly as the men the fatigues of the nocturnal ride.Ramorny was compelled to keep at the Prince's rein, being under no small
anxiety lest, in his wayward fit, he might ride off from him entirely,
and, taking refuge in the house of some loyal baron, escape the snare
which was spread for him.He therefore suffered inexpressibly during the
ride, both in mind and in body.At length the forest of Falkland received them, and a glimpse of the
moon showed the dark and huge tower, an appendage of royalty itself,
though granted for a season to the Duke of Albany.On a signal given the
drawbridge fell.Torches glared in the courtyard, menials attended,
and the Prince, assisted from horseback, was ushered into an apartment,
where Ramorny waited on him, together with Dwining, and entreated him
to take the leech's advice.The Duke of Rothsay repulsed the proposal,
haughtily ordered his bed to be prepared, and having stood for some time
shivering in his dank garments beside a large blazing fire, he retired
to his apartment without taking leave of anyone."You see the peevish humour of this childish boy, now," said Ramorny to
Dwining; "can you wonder that a servant who has done so much for him as
I have should be tired of such a master?""No, truly," said Dwining, "that and the promised earldom of Lindores
would shake any man's fidelity.But shall we commence with him this
evening?He has, if eye and cheek speak true, the foundation of a fever
within him, which will make our work easy while it will seem the effect
of nature.""It is an opportunity lost," said Ramorny; "but we must delay our blow
till he has seen this beauty, Catharine Glover.She may be hereafter a
witness that she saw him in good health, and master of his own motions,
a brief space before--you understand me?"Dwining nodded assent, and added:

"There is no time lost; for there is little difficulty in blighting a
flower exhausted from having been made to bloom too soon."in sooth he was a shameless wight,
     Sore given to revel and ungodly glee:
     Few earthly things found favour in his sight,
     Save concubines and carnal companie,
     And flaunting wassailers of high and low degree.With the next morning the humour of the Duke of Rothsay was changed.He complained, indeed, of pain and fever, but they rather seemed to
stimulate than to overwhelm him.He was familiar with Ramorny, and
though he said nothing on the subject of the preceding night, it was
plain he remembered what he desired to obliterate from the memory of his
followers--the ill humour he had then displayed.He was civil to every
one, and jested with Ramorny on the subject of Catharine's arrival."How surprised will the pretty prude be at seeing herself in a family
of men, when she expects to be admitted amongst the hoods and pinners
of Dame Marjory's waiting women!Thou hast not many of the tender sex in
thy household, I take it, Ramorny?""Faith, none except the minstrel wench, but a household drudge or two
whom we may not dispense with.By the way, she is anxiously inquiring
after the mistress your Highness promised to prefer her to.Shall I
dismiss her, to hunt for her new mistress at leisure?""By no means, she will serve to amuse Catharine.And, hark you, were it
not well to receive that coy jillet with something of a mumming?"We will not disappoint her, since she expects
to find the Duchess of Rothsay: I will be Duke and Duchess in my own
person.""No one so dull as a wit," said the Prince, "when he does not hit off
the scent at once.My Duchess, as they call her, has been in as great a
hurry to run away from Falkland as I to come hither.There is as much female trumpery in the wardrobe
adjoining to my sleeping room as would equip a whole carnival.Look you,
I will play Dame Marjory, disposed on this day bed here with a mourning
veil and a wreath of willow, to show my forsaken plight; thou, John,
wilt look starch and stiff enough for her Galwegian maid of honour,
the Countess Hermigild; and Dwining shall present the old Hecate, her
nurse--only she hath more beard on her upper lip than Dwining on his
whole face, and skull to boot.He should have the commodity of a beard
to set her forth conformably.Get thy kitchen drudges, and what passable
pages thou hast with thee, to make my women of the bedroom.Ramorny hasted into the anteroom, and told Dwining the Prince's device."Do thou look to humour the fool," he said; "I care not how little I see
him, knowing what is to be done.""Trust all to me," said the physician, shrugging his shoulders."What
sort of a butcher is he that can cut the lamb's throat, yet is afraid to
hear it bleat?""Tush, fear not my constancy: I cannot forget that he would have cast
me into the cloister with as little regard as if he threw away the
truncheon of a broken lance.Begone--yet stay; ere you go to arrange
this silly pageant, something must be settled to impose on the thick
witted Charteris.He is like enough, should he be left in the belief
that the Duchess of Rothsay is still here, and Catharine Glover in
attendance on her, to come down with offers of service, and the like,
when, as I need scarce tell thee, his presence would be inconvenient.Indeed, this is the more likely, that some folks have given a warmer
name to the iron headed knight's great and tender patronage of this
damsel.""With that hint, let me alone to deal with him.I will send him such a
letter, that for this month he shall hold himself as ready for a journey
to hell as to Falkland.Can you tell me the name of the Duchess's
confessor?""Waltheof, a grey friar."In a few minutes, for he was a clerk of rare celerity, Dwining finished
a letter, which he placed in Ramorny's hand."This is admirable, and would have made thy fortune with Rothsay.I
think I should have been too jealous to trust thee in his household,
save that his day is closed.""Read it aloud," said Dwining, "that we may judge if it goes trippingly
off."And Ramorny read as follows: "By command of our high and mighty Princess
Marjory, Duchess of Rothsay, and so forth, we Waltheof, unworthy brother
of the order of St.Francis, do thee, Sir Patrick Charteris, knight of
Kinfauns, to know, that her Highness marvels much at the temerity with
which you have sent to her presence a woman of whose fame she can judge
but lightly, seeing she hath made her abode, without any necessity,
for more than a week in thine own castle, without company of any other
female, saving menials; of which foul cohabitation the savour is gone
up through Fife, Angus, and Perthshire.Nevertheless, her Highness,
considering the ease as one of human frailty, hath not caused this
wanton one to be scourged with nettles, or otherwise to dree penance;
but, as two good brethren of the convent of Lindores, the Fathers
Thickskull and Dundermore, have been summoned up to the Highlands upon
an especial call, her Highness hath committed to their care this maiden
Catharine, with charge to convey her to her father, whom she states
to be residing beside Loch Tay, under whose protection she will find
a situation more fitting her qualities and habits than the Castle of
Falkland, while her Highness the Duchess of Rothsay abides there.She
hath charged the said reverend brothers so to deal with the young woman
as may give her a sense of the sin of incontinence, and she commendeth
thee to confession and penitence.--Signed, Waltheof, by command of an
high and mighty Princess"; and so forth.When he had finished, "Excellent--excellent!""This
unexpected rebuff will drive Charteris mad!He hath been long making
a sort of homage to this lady, and to find himself suspected of
incontinence, when he was expecting the full credit of a charitable
action, will altogether confound him; and, as thou say'st, it will be
long enough ere he come hither to look after the damsel or do honour
to the dame.But away to thy pageant, while I prepare that which shall
close the pageant for ever."It was an hour before noon, when Catharine, escorted by old Henshaw and
a groom of the Knight of Kinfauns, arrived before the lordly tower of
Falkland.The broad banner which was displayed from it bore the arms
of Rothsay, the servants who appeared wore the colours of the Prince's
household, all confirming the general belief that the Duchess still
resided there.Catharine's heart throbbed, for she had heard that
the Duchess had the pride as well as the high courage of the house
of Douglas, and felt uncertain touching the reception she was to
experience.On entering the castle, she observed that the train was
smaller than she had expected, but, as the Duchess lived in close
retirement, she was little surprised at this.In a species of anteroom
she was met by a little old woman, who seemed bent double with age, and
supported herself upon an ebony staff."Truly thou art welcome, fair daughter," said she, saluting Catharine,
"and, as I may say, to an afflicted house; and I trust (once more
saluting her) thou wilt be a consolation to my precious and right royal
daughter the Duchess.Sit thee down, my child, till I see whether my
lady be at leisure to receive thee.Ah, my child, thou art very lovely
indeed, if Our Lady hath given to thee a soul to match with so fair a
body."With that the counterfeit old woman crept into the next apartment,
where she found Rothsay in the masquerading habit he had prepared, and
Ramorny, who had evaded taking part in the pageant, in his ordinary
attire."Thou art a precious rascal, sir doctor," said the Prince; "by my
honour, I think thou couldst find in thy heart to play out the whole
play thyself, lover's part and all.""If it were to save your Highness trouble," said the leech, with his
usual subdued laugh."No--no," said Rothsay, "I never need thy help, man; and tell me now,
how look I, thus disposed on the couch--languishing and ladylike, ha?""Something too fine complexioned and soft featured for the Lady Marjory
of Douglas, if I may presume to say so," said the leech."Away, villain, and marshal in this fair frost piece--fear not she will
complain of my effeminacy; and thou, Ramorny, away also."As the knight left the apartment by one door, the fictitious old woman
ushered in Catharine Glover by another.The room had been carefully
darkened to twilight, so that Catharine saw the apparently female figure
stretched on the couch without the least suspicion.asked Rothsay, in a voice naturally sweet, and now
carefully modulated to a whispering tone."Let her approach, Griselda,
and kiss our hand."The supposed nurse led the trembling maiden forward to the side of the
couch, and signed to her to kneel.Catharine did so, and kissed with
much devotion and simplicity the gloved hand which the counterfeit
duchess extended to her."Be not afraid," said the same musical voice; "in me you only see a
melancholy example of the vanity of human greatness; happy those, my
child, whose rank places them beneath the storms of state."While he spoke, he put his arms around her neck and drew her towards
him, as if to salute her in token of welcome.But the kiss was bestowed
with an earnestness which so much overacted the part of the fair
patroness, that Catharine, concluding the Duchess had lost her senses,
screamed aloud.Catharine looked around her; the nurse was gone, and the Duke tearing
off his veil, she saw herself in the power of a daring young libertine.she said; "and Thou wilt, if I forsake
not myself."As this resolution darted through her mind, she repressed her
disposition to scream, and, as far as she might, strove to conceal her
fear."The jest hath been played," she said, with as much firmness as she
could assume; "may I entreat that your Highness will now unhand me?"for
he still kept hold of her arm."Nay, my pretty captive, struggle not--why should you fear?"As you are pleased to detain me, I will
not, by striving, provoke you to use me ill, and give pain to yourself,
when you have time to think.""Why, thou traitress, thou hast held me captive for months," said the
Prince, "and wilt thou not let me hold thee for a moment?""This were gallantry, my lord, were it in the streets of Perth, where I
might listen or escape as I listed; it is tyranny here.""And if I did let thee go, whither wouldst thou fly?""The bridges are up, the portcullis down, and the men who follow me are
strangely deaf to a peevish maiden's squalls.Be kind, therefore, and
you shall know what it is to oblige a prince.""Unloose me, then, my lord, and hear me appeal from thyself to thyself,
from Rothsay to the Prince of Scotland.I am the daughter of an humble
but honest citizen.I am, I may well nigh say, the spouse of a brave and
honest man.If I have given your Highness any encouragement for what you
have done, it has been unintentional.Thus forewarned, I entreat you to
forego your power over me, and suffer me to depart.Your Highness can
obtain nothing from me, save by means equally unworthy of knighthood or
manhood.""You are bold, Catharine," said the Prince, "but neither as a knight
nor a man can I avoid accepting a defiance.I must teach you the risk of
such challenges."While he spoke, he attempted to throw his arms again around her; but she
eluded his grasp, and proceeded in the same tone of firm decision."My strength, my lord, is as great to defend myself in an honourable
strife as yours can be to assail me with a most dishonourable purpose.Do not shame yourself and me by putting it to the combat.You may stun
me with blows, or you may call aid to overpower me; but otherwise you
will fail of your purpose.""The force I would
use is no more than excuses women in yielding to their own weakness.""Then keep it," said Catharine, "for those women who desire such an
excuse.My resistance is that of the most determined mind which love
of honour and fear of shame ever inspired.my lord, could you
succeed, you would but break every bond between me and life, between
yourself and honour.I have been trained fraudulently here, by what
decoys I know not; but were I to go dishonoured hence, it would be to
denounce the destroyer of my happiness to every quarter of Europe.I would take the palmer's staff in my hand, and wherever chivalry is
honoured, or the word Scotland has been heard, I would proclaim the heir
of a hundred kings, the son of the godly Robert Stuart, the heir of
the heroic Bruce, a truthless, faithless man, unworthy of the crown he
expects and of the spurs he wears.Every lady in wide Europe would hold
your name too foul for her lips; every worthy knight would hold you
a baffled, forsworn caitiff, false to the first vow of arms, the
protection of woman and the defence of the feeble."Rothsay resumed his seat, and looked at her with a countenance in which
resentment was mingled with admiration."You forget to whom you speak,
maiden.Know, the distinction I have offered you is one for which
hundreds whose trains you are born to bear would feel gratitude.""Once more, my lord," resumed Catharine, "keep these favours for those
by whom they are prized; or rather reserve your time and your health
for other and nobler pursuits--for the defence of your country and
the happiness of your subjects.Alas, my lord, how willingly would an
exulting people receive you for their chief!How gladly would they close
around you, did you show desire to head them against the oppression of
the mighty, the violence of the lawless, the seduction of the vicious,
and the tyranny of the hypocrite!"The Duke of Rothsay, whose virtuous feelings were as easily excited
as they were evanescent, was affected by the enthusiasm with which she
spoke."Forgive me if I have alarmed you, maiden," he said "thou art
too noble minded to be the toy of passing pleasure, for which my mistake
destined thee; and I, even were thy birth worthy of thy noble spirit and
transcendent beauty, have no heart to give thee; for by the homage of
the heart only should such as thou be wooed.But my hopes have been
blighted, Catharine: the only woman I ever loved has been torn from me
in the very wantonness of policy, and a wife imposed on me whom I must
ever detest, even had she the loveliness and softness which alone can
render a woman amiable in my eyes.My health is fading even in early
youth; and all that is left for me is to snatch such flowers as the
short passage from life to the grave will now present.Look at my hectic
cheek; feel, if you will, my intermitting pulse; and pity me and excuse
me if I, whose rights as a prince and as a man have been trampled upon
and usurped, feel occasional indifference towards the rights of others,
and indulge a selfish desire to gratify the wish of the passing moment."exclaimed Catharine, with the enthusiasm which belonged
to her character--"I will call you my dear lord, for dear must the heir
of Bruce be to every child of Scotland--let me not, I pray, hear you
speak thus!Your glorious ancestor endured exile, persecution, the night
of famine, and the day of unequal combat, to free his country; do you
practise the like self denial to free yourself.Tear yourself from those
who find their own way to greatness smoothed by feeding your follies.You know it not, I am sure--you could not
know; but the wretch who could urge the daughter to courses of shame by
threatening the life of the aged father is capable of all that is vile,
all that is treacherous!""He did indeed, my lord, and he dares not deny it.""It shall be looked to," answered the Duke of Rothsay."I have ceased
to love him; but he has suffered much for my sake, and I must see his
services honourably requited."Oh, my lord, if chronicles speak true, such services
brought Troy to ruins and gave the infidels possession of Spain.""Hush, maiden--speak within compass, I pray you," said the Prince,
rising up; "our conference ends here.""Yet one word, my Lord Duke of Rothsay," said Catharine, with animation,
while her beautiful countenance resembled that of an admonitory angel."I cannot tell what impels me to speak thus boldly; but the fire burns
within me, and will break out.Leave this castle without an hour's
delay; the air is unwholesome for you.Dismiss this Ramorny before the
day is ten minutes older; his company is most dangerous.""None in especial," answered Catharine, abashed at her own
eagerness--"none, perhaps, excepting my fears for your safety.""To vague fears the heir of Bruce must not listen.Ramorny entered, and bowed low to the Duke and to the maiden, whom,
perhaps, he considered as likely to be preferred to the post of
favourite sultana, and therefore entitled to a courteous obeisance."Ramorny," said the Prince, "is there in the household any female of
reputation who is fit to wait on this young woman till we can send her
where she may desire to go?""I fear," replied Ramorny, "if it displease not your Highness to hear
the truth, your household is indifferently provided in that way; and
that, to speak the very verity, the glee maiden is the most decorous
amongst us.""Let her wait upon this young person, then, since better may not be.And
take patience, maiden, for a few hours.""So, my lord, part you so soon from the Fair Maid of Perth?This is,
indeed, the very wantonness of victory.""There is neither victory nor defeat in the case," returned the Prince,
drily."The girl loves me not; nor do I love her well enough to torment
myself concerning her scruples.""The chaste Malcolm the Maiden revived in one of his descendants!""Favour me, sir, by a truce to your wit, or by choosing a different
subject for its career.It is noon, I believe, and you will oblige me by
commanding them to serve up dinner."Ramorny left the room; but Rothsay thought he discovered a smile upon
his countenance, and to be the subject of this man's satire gave him no
ordinary degree of pain.He summoned, however, the knight to his table,
and even admitted Dwining to the same honour.The conversation was of
a lively and dissolute cast, a tone encouraged by the Prince, as if
designing to counterbalance the gravity of his morals in the morning,
which Ramorny, who was read in old chronicles, had the boldness to liken
to the continence of Scipio.The banquet, nothwithstanding the Duke's indifferent health, was
protracted in idle wantonness far beyond the rules of temperance; and,
whether owing simply to the strength of the wine which he drank, or the
weakness of his constitution, or, as it is probable, because the last
wine which he quaffed had been adulterated by Dwining, it so happened
that the Prince, towards the end of the repast, fell into a lethargic
sleep, from which it seemed impossible to rouse him.Sir John Ramorny
and Dwining carried him to his chamber, accepting no other assistance
than that of another person, whom we will afterwards give name to.Next morning, it was announced that the Prince was taken ill of
an infectious disorder; and, to prevent its spreading through the
household, no one was admitted to wait on him save his late master of
horse, the physician Dwining, and the domestic already mentioned; one of
whom seemed always to remain in the apartment, while the others observed
a degree of precaution respecting their intercourse with the rest of the
family, so strict as to maintain the belief that he was dangerously ill
of an infectious disorder.In winter's tedious nights, sit by the fire,
     With good old folks, and let them tell thee tales
     Of woeful ages, long ago betid:
     And, ere thou bid goodnight, to quit their grief,
     Tell thou the lamentable fall of me.King Richard II Act V. Scene I.


Far different had been the fate of the misguided heir of Scotland from
that which was publicly given out in the town of Falkland.His ambitious
uncle had determined on his death, as the means of removing the first
and most formidable barrier betwixt his own family and the throne.James, the younger son of the King, was a mere boy, who might at more
leisure be easily set aside.Ramorny's views of aggrandisement, and the
resentment which he had latterly entertained against his masters made
him a willing agent in young Rothsay's destruction.Dwining's love of
gold, and his native malignity of disposition, rendered him equally
forward.It had been resolved, with the most calculating cruelty,
that all means which might leave behind marks of violence were to be
carefully avoided, and the extinction of life suffered to take place
of itself by privation of every kind acting upon a frail and impaired
constitution.The Prince of Scotland was not to be murdered, as Ramorny
had expressed himself on another occasion, he was only to cease to
exist.Rothsay's bedchamber in the Tower of Falkland was well adapted
for the execution of such a horrible project.A small, narrow staircase,
scarce known to exist, opened from thence by a trapdoor to the
subterranean dungeons of the castle, through a passage by which
the feudal lord was wont to visit, in private and in disguise, the
inhabitants of those miserable regions.By this staircase the villains
conveyed the insensible Prince to the lowest dungeon of the castle,
so deep in the bowels of the earth, that no cries or groans, it was
supposed, could possibly be heard, while the strength of its door and
fastenings must for a long time have defied force, even if the entrance
could have been discovered.Bonthron, who had been saved from the
gallows for the purpose, was the willing agent of Ramorny's unparalleled
cruelty to his misled and betrayed patron.This wretch revisited the dungeon at the time when the Prince's lethargy
began to wear off, and when, awaking to sensation, he felt himself
deadly cold, unable to move, and oppressed with fetters, which scarce
permitted him to stir from the dank straw on which he was laid.His
first idea was that he was in a fearful dream, his next brought a
confused augury of the truth.He called, shouted, yelled at length in
frenzy but no assistance came, and he was only answered by the vaulted
roof of the dungeon.The agent of hell heard these agonizing screams,
and deliberately reckoned them against the taunts and reproaches with
which Rothsay had expressed his instinctive aversion to him.When,
exhausted and hopeless, the unhappy youth remained silent, the savage
resolved to present himself before the eyes of his prisoner.The locks
were drawn, the chain fell; the Prince raised himself as high as his
fetters permitted; a red glare, against which he was fain to shut his
eyes, streamed through the vault; and when he opened them again, it was
on the ghastly form of one whom he had reason to think dead."I am judged and condemned," he exclaimed, "and the most abhorred fiend
in the infernal regions is sent to torment me!""I live, my lord," said Bonthron; "and that you may live and enjoy life,
be pleased to sit up and eat your victuals.""Free me from these irons," said the Prince, "release me from this
dungeon, and, dog as thou art, thou shalt be the richest man in
Scotland.""If you would give me the weight of your shackles in gold," said
Bonthron, "I would rather see the iron on you than have the treasure
myself!But look up; you were wont to love delicate fare--behold how I
have catered for you."The wretch, with fiendish glee, unfolded a piece of rawhide covering the
bundle which he bore under' his arm, and, passing the light to and fro
before it, showed the unhappy Prince a bull's head recently hewn from
the trunk, and known in Scotland as the certain signal of death.He
placed it at the foot of the bed, or rather lair, on which the Prince
lay."Be moderate in your food," he said; "it is like to be long ere thou
getst another meal.""Tell me but one thing, wretch," said the Prince."Does Ramorny know of
this practice?""How else hadst thou been decoyed hither?Poor woodcock, thou art
snared!"With these words, the door shut, the bolts resounded, and the unhappy
Prince was left to darkness, solitude, and misery."Oh, my father!--my
prophetic father!The staff I leaned on has indeed proved a spear!"We will not dwell on the subsequent hours, nay, days, of bodily agony
and mental despair.But it was not the pleasure of Heaven that so great a crime should be
perpetrated with impunity.Catharine Glover and the glee woman, neglected by the other inmates,
who seemed to be engaged with the tidings of the Prince's illness, were,
however, refused permission to leave the castle until it should be seen
how this alarming disease was to terminate, and whether it was actually
an infectious sickness.Forced on each other's society, the two desolate
women became companions, if not friends; and the union drew somewhat
closer when Catharine discovered that this was the same female minstrel
on whose account Henry Wynd had fallen under her displeasure.She now
heard his complete vindication, and listened with ardour to the praises
which Louise heaped on her gallant protector.On the other hand, the
minstrel, who felt the superiority of Catharine's station and character,
willingly dwelt upon a theme which seemed to please her, and recorded
her gratitude to the stout smith in the little song of "Bold and True,"
which was long a favourite in Scotland.Oh, bold and true,
     In bonnet blue,
     That fear or falsehood never knew,
     Whose heart was loyal to his word,
     Whose hand was faithful to his sword--
     Seek Europe wide from sea to sea,
     But bonny blue cap still for me!I've seen Almain's proud champions prance,
     Have seen the gallant knights of France,
     Unrivall'd with the sword and lance,
     Have seen the sons of England true,
     Wield the brown bill and bend the yew.Search France the fair, and England free,
     But bonny blue cap still for me!In short, though Louise's disreputable occupation would have been in
other circumstances an objection to Catharine's voluntarily frequenting
her company, yet, forced together as they now were, she found her a
humble and accommodating companion.They lived in this manner for four or five days, and, in order to avoid
as much as possible the gaze, and perhaps the incivility, of the menials
in the offices, they prepared their food in their own apartment.In the
absolutely necessary intercourse with domestics, Louise, more accustomed
to expedients, bolder by habit, and desirous to please Catharine,
willingly took on herself the trouble of getting from the pantler the
materials of their slender meal, and of arranging it with the dexterity
of her country.The glee woman had been abroad for this purpose upon the sixth day, a
little before noon; and the desire of fresh air, or the hope to find
some sallad or pot herbs, or at least an early flower or two, with which
to deck their board, had carried her into the small garden appertaining
to the castle.She re-entered her apartment in the tower with a
countenance pale as ashes, and a frame which trembled like an aspen
leaf.Her terror instantly extended itself to Catharine, who could
hardly find words to ask what new misfortune had occurred.said Louise, speaking under her breath, and huddling
her words so thick upon each other that Catharine could hardly catch
the sense."I was seeking for flowers to dress your pottage, because
you said you loved them yesterday; my poor little dog, thrusting himself
into a thicket of yew and holly bushes that grow out of some old ruins
close to the castle wall, came back whining and howling.I crept forward
to see what might be the cause--and, oh!I heard a groaning as of one
in extreme pain, but so faint, that it seemed to arise out of the very
depth of the earth.At length, I found it proceeded from a small rent in
the wall, covered with ivy; and when I laid my ear close to the opening,
I could hear the Prince's voice distinctly say, 'It cannot now last
long'--and then it sunk away in something like a prayer.""I said, 'Is it you, my lord?'and the answer was, 'Who mocks me with
that title?'I asked him if I could help him, and he answered with a
voice I shall never forget, 'Food--food!So I came
hither to tell you.that were more likely to destroy than to aid," said Catharine."I know not yet," said Catharine, prompt and bold on occasions of
moment, though yielding to her companion in ingenuity of resource on
ordinary occasions: "I know not yet, but something we will do: the blood
of Bruce shall not die unaided."So saying, she seized the small cruise which contained their soup, and
the meat of which it was made, wrapped some thin cakes which she had
baked into the fold of her plaid, and, beckoning her companion to follow
with a vessel of milk, also part of their provisions, she hastened
towards the garden."So, our fair vestal is stirring abroad?"said the only man she met, who
was one of the menials; but Catharine passed on without notice or reply,
and gained the little garden without farther interruption.Louise indicated to her a heap of ruins, which, covered with underwood,
was close to the castle wall.It had probably been originally a
projection from the building; and the small fissure, which communicated
with the dungeon, contrived for air, had terminated within it.But the
aperture had been a little enlarged by decay, and admitted a dim ray of
light to its recesses, although it could not be observed by those who
visited the place with torchlight aids."Here is dead silence," said Catharine, after she had listened
attentively for a moment."Heaven and earth, he is gone!""We must risk something," said her companion, and ran her fingers over
the strings of her guitar.A sigh was the only answer from the depth of the dungeon."I am here, my lord--I am here, with food and drink."The jest comes too late; I am dying," was the answer."His brain is turned, and no wonder," thought Catharine; "but whilst
there is life, there may be hope.""It is I, my lord, Catharine Glover.I have food, if I could pass it
safely to you."I thought the pain was over, but it glows
again within me at the name of food.""The food is here, but how--ah, how can I pass it to you?the chink
is so narrow, the wall is so thick!Yet there is a remedy--I have it.Quick, Louise; cut me a willow bough, the tallest you can find."The glee maiden obeyed, and, by means of a cleft in the top of the
wand, Catharine transmitted several morsels of the soft cakes, soaked in
broth, which served at once for food and for drink.The unfortunate young man ate little, and with difficulty, but prayed
for a thousand blessings on the head of his comforter."I had destined
thee to be the slave of my vices," he said, "and yet thou triest to
become the preserver of my life!"I will return with food as I shall see opportunity," said Catharine,
just as the glee maiden plucked her sleeve and desired her to be silent
and stand close.Both crouched among the ruins, and they heard the voices of Ramorny and
the mediciner in close conversation."He is stronger than I thought," said the former, in a low, croaking
tone."How long held out Dalwolsy, when the knight of Liddesdale
prisoned him in his castle of Hermitage?""For a fortnight," answered Dwining; "but he was a strong man, and had
some assistance by grain which fell from a granary above his prison
house.""Were it not better end the matter more speedily?He will demand to see the
Prince, and all must be over ere he comes."They passed on in their dark and fatal conversation."Now gain we the tower," said Catharine to her companion, when she saw
they had left the garden."I had a plan of escape for myself; I will
turn it into one of rescue for the Prince.The dey woman enters the
castle about vesper time, and usually leaves her cloak in the passage as
she goes into the pantlers' office with the milk.Take thou the cloak,
muffle thyself close, and pass the warder boldly; he is usually drunken
at that hour, and thou wilt go as the dey woman unchallenged through
gate and along bridge, if thou bear thyself with confidence.Then away
to meet the Black Douglas; he is our nearest and only aid.""But," said Louise, "is he not that terrible lord who threatened me with
shame and punishment?""Believe it," said Catharine, "such as thou or I never dwelt an hour in
the Douglas's memory, either for good or evil.Tell him that his son in
law, the Prince of Scotland dies--treacherously famished--in Falkland
Castle, and thou wilt merit not pardon only, but reward.""I care not for reward," said Louise; "the deed will reward itself.But
methinks to stay is more dangerous than to go.Let me stay, then, and
nourish the unhappy Prince, and do you depart to bring help.If they
kill me before you return, I leave you my poor lute, and pray you to be
kind to my poor Charlot.""No, Louise," replied Catharine, "you are a more privileged and
experienced wanderer than I--do you go; and if you find me dead on your
return, as may well chance, give my poor father this ring and a lock of
my hair, and say, Catharine died in endeavouring to save the blood of
Bruce.And give this other lock to Henry; say, Catharine thought of him
to the last, and that, if he has judged her too scrupulous touching the
blood of others, he will then know it was not because she valued her
own."They sobbed in each other's arms, and the intervening hours till evening
were spent in endeavouring to devise some better mode of supplying the
captive with nourishment, and in the construction of a tube, composed
of hollow reeds, slipping into each other, by which liquids might be
conveyed to him.The bell of the village church of Falkland tolled to
vespers.The dey, or farm woman, entered with her pitchers to deliver
the milk for the family, and to hear and tell the news stirring.She had
scarcely entered the kitchen when the female minstrel, again throwing
herself in Catharine's arms, and assuring her of her unalterable
fidelity, crept in silence downstairs, the little dog under her arm.A
moment after, she was seen by the breathless Catharine, wrapt in the dey
woman's cloak, and walking composedly across the drawbridge."So," said the warder, "you return early tonight, May Bridget?Small
mirth towards in the hall--ha, wench!"I have forgotten my tallies," said the ready witted French woman, "and
will return in the skimming of a bowie."She went onward, avoiding the village of Falkland, and took a footpath
which led through the park.Catharine breathed freely, and blessed God
when she saw her lost in the distance.It was another anxious hour
for Catharine which occurred before the escape of the fugitive was
discovered.This happened so soon as the dey girl, having taken an hour
to perform a task which ten minutes might have accomplished, was about
to return, and discovered that some one had taken away her grey frieze
cloak.A strict search was set on foot; at length the women of the
house remembered the glee maiden, and ventured to suggest her as one not
unlikely to exchange an old cloak for a new one.The warder, strictly
questioned, averred he saw the dey woman depart immediately after
vespers; and on this being contradicted by the party herself, he could
suggest, as the only alternative, that it must needs have been the
devil.As, however, the glee woman could not be found, the real circumstances
of the case were easily guessed at; and the steward went to inform Sir
John Ramorny and Dwining, who were now scarcely ever separate, of
the escape of one of their female captives.Everything awakens the
suspicions of the guilty.They looked on each other with faces of
dismay, and then went together to the humble apartment of Catharine,
that they might take her as much as possible by surprise while they
inquired into the facts attending Louise's disappearance.said Ramorny, in a tone of
austere gravity."I have no companion here," answered Catharine."Trifle not," replied the knight; "I mean the glee maiden, who lately
dwelt in this chamber with you.""She is gone, they tell me," said Catharine--"gone about an hour since.""How," answered Catharine, "should I know which way a professed wanderer
may choose to travel?She was tired no doubt of a solitary life, so
different from the scenes of feasting and dancing which her trade leads
her to frequent.She is gone, and the only wonder is that she should
have stayed so long.""This, then," said Ramorny, "is all you have to tell us?""All that I have to tell you, Sir John," answered Catharine, firmly;
"and if the Prince himself inquire, I can tell him no more.""There is little danger of his again doing you the honour to speak to
you in person," said Ramorny, "even if Scotland should escape being
rendered miserable by the sad event of his decease.""Is the Duke of Rothsay so very ill?""No help, save in Heaven," answered Ramorny, looking upward."Then may there yet be help there," said Catharine, "if human aid prove
unavailing!"said Ramorny, with the most determined gravity; while Dwining
adopted a face fit to echo the feeling, though it seemed to cost him
a painful struggle to suppress his sneering yet soft laugh of triumph,
which was peculiarly excited by anything having a religious tendency."And it is men--earthly men, and not incarnate devils, who thus appeal
to Heaven, while they are devouring by inches the life blood of their
hapless master!"muttered Catharine, as her two baffled inquisitors left
the apartment.But it will roll ere long, and
oh!may it be to preserve as well as to punish!"The hour of dinner alone afforded a space when, all in the castle being
occupied with that meal, Catharine thought she had the best opportunity
of venturing to the breach in the wall, with the least chance of being
observed.In waiting for the hour, she observed some stir in the castle,
which had been silent as the grave ever since the seclusion of the Duke
of Rothsay.The portcullis was lowered and raised, and the creaking of
the machinery was intermingled with the tramp of horse, as men at arms
went out and returned with steeds hard ridden and covered with foam.She
observed, too, that such domestics as she casually saw from her window
were in arms.All this made her heart throb high, for it augured the
approach of rescue; and besides, the bustle left the little garden more
lonely than ever.At length the hour of noon arrived; she had taken care
to provide, under pretence of her own wishes, which the pantler seemed
disposed to indulge, such articles of food as could be the most easily
conveyed to the unhappy captive.She whispered to intimate her presence;
there was no answer; she spoke louder, still there was silence."He sleeps," she muttered these words half aloud, and with a shuddering
which was succeeded by a start and a scream, when a voice replied behind
her:

"Yes, he sleeps; but it is for ever."Sir John Ramorny stood behind her in complete armour,
but the visor of his helmet was up, and displayed a countenance more
resembling one about to die than to fight.He spoke with a grave tone,
something between that of a calm observer of an interesting event and of
one who is an agent and partaker in it."Catharine," he said, "all is true which I tell you.You
have done your best for him; you can do no more.""I will not--I cannot believe it," said Catharine."Heaven be merciful
to me!it would make one doubt of Providence, to think so great a crime
has been accomplished.""Doubt not of Providence, Catharine, though it has suffered the
profligate to fall by his own devices.Follow me; I have that to say
which concerns you.I say follow (for she hesitated), unless you prefer
being left to the mercies of the brute Bonthron and the mediciner
Henbane Dwining.""I will follow you," said Catharine."You cannot do more to me than you
are permitted."He led the way into the tower, and mounted staircase after staircase and
ladder after ladder."I will follow no farther," she said.If to my death, I can die here.""Only to the battlements of the castle, fool," said Ramorny, throwing
wide a barred door which opened upon the vaulted roof of the castle,
where men were bending mangonels, as they called them (military engines,
that is, for throwing arrows or stones), getting ready crossbows, and
piling stones together.But the defenders did not exceed twenty in
number, and Catharine thought she could observe doubt and irresolution
amongst them."Catharine," said Ramorny, "I must not quit this station, which is
necessary for my defence; but I can speak with you here as well as
elsewhere.""Say on," answered Catharine, "I am prepared to hear you.""You have thrust yourself, Catharine, into a bloody secret.Have you the
firmness to keep it?""I do not understand you, Sir John," answered the maiden.I have slain--murdered, if you will--my late master, the Duke
of Rothsay.The spark of life which your kindness would have fed
was easily smothered.You are
faint--bear up--you have more to hear.You know the crime, but you know
not the provocation.this gauntlet is empty; I lost my right hand
in his cause, and when I was no longer fit to serve him, I was cast off
like a worn out hound, my loss ridiculed, and a cloister recommended,
instead of the halls and palaces in which I had my natural sphere!Think
on this--pity and assist me.""In what manner can you require my assistance?"said the trembling
maiden; "I can neither repair your loss nor cancel your crime.""Thou canst be silent, Catharine, on what thou hast seen and heard in
yonder thicket.It is but a brief oblivion I ask of you, whose word
will, I know, be listened to, whether you say such things were or were
not.That of your mountebank companion, the foreigner, none will hold
to be of a pin point's value.If you grant me this, I will take your
promise for my security, and throw the gate open to those who now
approach it.If you will not promise silence, I defend this castle till
every one perishes, and I fling you headlong from these battlements.Ay, look at them--it is not a leap to be rashly braved.Seven courses of
stairs brought you up hither with fatigue and shortened breath; but you
shall go from the top to the bottom in briefer time than you can breathe
a sigh!Speak the word, fair maid; for you speak to one unwilling to
harm you, but determined in his purpose."Catharine stood terrified, and without power of answering a man who
seemed so desperate; but she was saved the necessity of reply by the
approach of Dwining.He spoke with the same humble conges which at all
times distinguished his manner, and with his usual suppressed ironical
sneer, which gave that manner the lie."I do you wrong, noble sir, to intrude on your valiancie when engaged
with a fair damsel.But I come to ask a trifling question."said Ramorny; "ill news are sport to thee even when
they affect thyself, so that they concern others also.""Hem!--he, he!--I only desired to know if your knighthood proposed the
chivalrous task of defending the castle with your single hand--I crave
pardon, I meant your single arm?The question is worth asking, for I
am good for little to aid the defence, unless you could prevail on the
besiegers to take physic--he, he, he!--and Bonthron is as drunk as ale
and strong waters can make him; and you, he, and I make up the whole
garrison who are disposed for resistance.""Never saw men who showed less stomach to the work," answered
Dwining--"never.Eviot and his companion Buncle now approached, with sullen resolution
in their faces, like men who had made their minds up to resist that
authority which they had so long obeyed.said Ramorny, stepping forward to meet them.Why have you left the barbican, Eviot?And you other fellow,
did I not charge you to look to the mangonels?""We have something to tell you, Sir John Ramorny," answered Eviot."We
will not fight in this quarrel.""How--my own squires control me?""We were your squires and pages, my lord, while you were master of the
Duke of Rothsay's household.It is bruited about the Duke no longer
lives; we desire to know the truth.""What traitor dares spread such falsehoods?""All who have gone out to skirt the forest, my lord, and I myself among
others, bring back the same news.The minstrel woman who left the castle
yesterday has spread the report everywhere that the Duke of Rothsay
is murdered, or at death's door.The Douglas comes on us with a strong
force--"

"And you, cowards, take advantage of an idle report to forsake your
master?""My lord," said Eviot, "let Buncle and myself see the Duke of Rothsay,
and receive his personal orders for defence of this castle, and if we do
not fight to the death in that quarrel, I will consent to be hanged on
its highest turret.But if he be gone by natural disease, we will yield
up the castle to the Earl of Douglas, who is, they say, the King's
lieutenant.Or if--which Heaven forefend!--the noble Prince has had
foul play, we will not involve ourselves in the guilt of using arms in
defence of the murderers, be they who they will.""Eviot," said Ramorny, raising his mutilated arm, "had not that glove
been empty, thou hadst not lived to utter two words of this insolence.""It is as it is," answered Evict, "and we do but our duty.I have
followed you long, my lord, but here I draw bridle.""Farewell, then, and a curse light on all of you!""Our valiancie is about to run away," said the mediciner, who had crept
close to Catharine's side before she was aware."Catharine, thou art a
superstitious fool, like most women; nevertheless thou hast some mind,
and I speak to thee as one of more understanding than the buffaloes
which are herding about us.These haughty barons who overstride the
world, what are they in the day of adversity?Let
their sledge hammer hands or their column resembling legs have injury,
and bah!Heart and courage is nothing to
them, lith and limb everything: give them animal strength, what are they
better than furious bulls; take that away, and your hero of chivalry
lies grovelling like the brute when he is hamstrung.Not so the sage;
while a grain of sense remains in a crushed or mutilated frame, his mind
shall be strong as ever.Catharine, this morning I was practising your
death; but methinks I now rejoice that you may survive to tell how the
poor mediciner, the pill gilder, the mortar pounder, the poison vender,
met his fate, in company with the gallant Knight of Ramorny, Baron in
possession and Earl of Lindores in expectation--God save his lordship!""Old man," said Catharine, "if thou be indeed so near the day of thy
deserved doom, other thoughts were far wholesomer than the vainglorious
ravings of a vain philosophy.Ask to see a holy man--"

"Yes," said Dwining, scornfully, "refer myself to a greasy monk, who
does not--he!he!--understand the barbarous Latin he repeats by
rote.Such would be a fitting counsellor to one who has studied both
in Spain and Arabia!No, Catharine, I will choose a confessor that is
pleasant to look upon, and you shall be honoured with the office.Now,
look yonder at his valiancie, his eyebrow drops with moisture, his lip
trembles with agony; for his valiancie--he!he!--is pleading for his
life with his late domestics, and has not eloquence enough to persuade
them to let him slip.See how the fibres of his face work as he implores
the ungrateful brutes, whom he has heaped with obligations, to permit
him to get such a start for his life as the hare has from the greyhounds
when men course her fairly.Look also at the sullen, downcast, dogged
faces with which, fluctuating between fear and shame, the domestic
traitors deny their lord this poor chance for his life.These things
thought themselves the superior of a man like me!and you, foolish
wench, think so meanly of your Deity as to suppose wretches like them
are the work of Omnipotence!"said Catharine, warmly; "the God I worship
created these men with the attributes to know and adore Him, to guard
and defend their fellow creatures, to practise holiness and virtue.Their own vices, and the temptations of the Evil One, have made them
such as they now are.Oh, take the lesson home to thine own heart of
adamant!Heaven made thee wiser than thy fellows, gave thee eyes to look
into the secrets of nature, a sagacious heart, and a skilful hand; but
thy pride has poisoned all these fair gifts, and made an ungodly atheist
of one who might have been a Christian sage!""Atheist, say'st thou?""Perhaps I have doubts on that
matter--but they will be soon solved.Yonder comes one who will send
me, as he has done thousands, to the place where all mysteries shall be
cleared."Catharine followed the mediciner's eye up one of the forest glades, and
beheld it occupied by a body of horsemen advancing at full gallop.In
the midst was a pennon displayed, which, though its bearings were not
visible to Catharine, was, by a murmur around, acknowledged as that of
the Black Douglas.They halted within arrow shot of the castle, and a
herald with two trumpets advanced up to the main portal, where, after a
loud flourish, he demanded admittance for the high and dreaded Archibald
Earl of Douglas, Lord Lieutenant of the King, and acting for the time
with the plenary authority of his Majesty; commanding, at the same time,
that the inmates of the castle should lay down their arms, all under
penalty of high treason.said Eviot to Ramorny, who stood sullen and undecided."Will
you give orders to render the castle, or must I?"interrupted the knight, "to the last I will command you.Open the gates, drop the bridge, and render the castle to the Douglas.""Now, that's what may be called a gallant exertion of free will," said
Dwining."Just as if the pieces of brass that were screaming a minute
since should pretend to call those notes their own which are breathed
through them by a frowsy trumpeter."said Catharine, "either be silent or turn thy thoughts
to the eternity on the brink of which thou art standing.""Thou canst not, wench,
help hearing what I say to thee, and thou wilt tell it again, for thy
sex cannot help that either.Perth and all Scotland shall know what a
man they have lost in Henbane Dwining!"The clash of armour now announced that the newcomers had dismounted and
entered the castle, and were in the act of disarming the small garrison.Earl Douglas himself appeared on the battlements, with a few of his
followers, and signed to them to take Ramorny and Dwining into custody.Others dragged from some nook the stupefied Bonthron."It was to these three that the custody of the Prince was solely
committed daring his alleged illness?"said the Douglas, prosecuting an
inquiry which he had commenced in the hall of the castle."No other saw him, my lord," said Eviot, "though I offered my services.""Conduct us to the Duke's apartment, and bring the prisoners with
us.Also should there be a female in the castle, if she hath not been
murdered or spirited away--the companion of the glee maiden who brought
the first alarm.""She is here, my lord," said Eviot, bringing Catharine forward.Her beauty and her agitation made some impression even upon the
impassible Earl."Fear nothing, maiden," he said; "thou hast deserved both praise and
reward.Tell to me, as thou wouldst confess to Heaven, the things thou
hast witnessed in this castle."Few words served Catharine to unfold the dreadful story."It agrees," said the Douglas, "with the tale of the glee maiden, from
point to point.They passed to the room which the unhappy Duke of Rothsay had been
supposed to inhabit; but the key was not to be found, and the Earl could
only obtain entrance by forcing the door.On entering, the wasted and
squalid remains of the unhappy Prince were discovered, flung on the bed
as if in haste.The intention of the murderers had apparently been to
arrange the dead body so as to resemble a timely parted corpse, but they
had been disconcerted by the alarm occasioned by the escape of Louise.Douglas looked on the body of the misguided youth, whose wild passions
and caprices had brought him to this fatal and premature catastrophe."I had wrongs to be redressed," he said; "but to see such a sight as
this banishes all remembrance of injury!"It should have been arranged," said Dwining, "more to your
omnipotence's pleasure; but you came suddenly on us, and hasty masters
make slovenly service."Douglas seemed not to hear what his prisoner said, so closely did he
examine the wan and wasted features, and stiffened limbs, of the dead
body before him.Catharine, overcome by sickness and fainting, at length
obtained permission to retire from the dreadful scene, and, through
confusion of every description, found her way to her former apartment,
where she was locked in the arms of Louise, who had returned in the
interval.The dying hand of the Prince
was found to be clenched upon a lock of hair, resembling, in colour and
texture, the coal black bristles of Bonthron.Thus, though famine had
begun the work, it would seem that Rothsay's death had been finally
accomplished by violence.The private stair to the dungeon, the keys of
which were found at the subaltern assassin's belt, the situation of the
vault, its communication with the external air by the fissure in the
walls, and the wretched lair of straw, with the fetters which remained
there, fully confirmed the story of Catharine and of the glee woman."We will not hesitate an instant," said the Douglas to his near kinsman,
the Lord Balveny, as soon as they returned from the dungeon."But, my lord, some trial may be fitting," answered Balveny."I have taken them red hand; my
authority will stretch to instant execution.Yet stay--have we not some
Jedwood men in our troop?""Plenty of Turnbulls, Rutherfords, Ainslies, and so forth," said
Balveny."Call me an inquest of these together; they are all good men and true,
saving a little shifting for their living.Do you see to the execution
of these felons, while I hold a court in the great hall, and we'll try
whether the jury or the provost marshal do their work first; we will
have Jedwood justice--hang in haste and try at leisure.""Yet stay, my lord," said Ramorny, "you may rue your haste--will you
grant me a word out of earshot?"said Douglas; "speak out what thou hast to say before
all that are here present.""Know all; then," said Ramorny, aloud, "that this noble Earl had letters
from the Duke of Albany and myself, sent him by the hand of yon cowardly
deserter, Buncle--let him deny it if he dare--counselling the removal
of the Duke for a space from court, and his seclusion in this Castle of
Falkland.""But not a word," replied Douglas, sternly smiling, "of his being flung
into a dungeon--famished--strangled.Away with the wretches, Balveny,
they pollute God's air too long!"The prisoners were dragged off to the battlements.But while the means
of execution were in the act of being prepared, the apothecary expressed
so ardent a desire to see Catharine once more, and, as he said, for
the good of his soul, that the maiden, in hopes his obduracy might have
undergone some change even at the last hour, consented again to go
to the battlements, and face a scene which her heart recoiled from.A single glance showed her Bonthron, sunk in total and drunken
insensibility; Ramorny, stripped of his armour, endeavouring in vain to
conceal fear, while he spoke with a priest, whose good offices he had
solicited; and Dwining, the same humble, obsequious looking, crouching
individual she had always known him.He held in his hand a little silver
pen, with which he had been writing on a scrap of parchment."Catharine," he said--"he, he, he!--I wish to speak to thee on the
nature of my religious faith.""If such be thy intention, why lose time with me?"The good father," said Dwining, "is--he, he!--already a worshipper of
the deity whom I have served.I therefore prefer to give the altar of
mine idol a new worshipper in thee, Catharine.This scrap of parchment
will tell thee how to make your way into my chapel, where I have
worshipped so often in safety.I leave the images which it contains to
thee as a legacy, simply because I hate and contemn thee something less
than any of the absurd wretches whom I have hitherto been obliged to
call fellow creatures.And now away--or remain and see if the end of the
quacksalver belies his life.""Nay," said the mediciner, "I have but a single word to say, and yonder
nobleman's valiancie may hear it if he will."Lord Balveny approached, with some curiosity; for the undaunted
resolution of a man who never wielded sword or bore armour and was in
person a poor dwindled dwarf, had to him an air of something resembling
sorcery.""You see this trifling implement," said the criminal, showing the
silver pen."By means of this I can escape the power even of the Black
Douglas.""Give him no ink nor paper," said Balveny, hastily, "he will draw a
spell.""Not so, please your wisdom and valiancie--he, he, he!"said Dwining
with his usual chuckle, as he unscrewed the top of the pen, within which
was a piece of sponge or some such substance, no bigger than a pea."Now, mark this--" said the prisoner, and drew it between his lips.He lay a dead corpse before them, the
contemptuous sneer still on his countenance.Catharine shrieked and fled, seeking, by a hasty descent, an escape from
a sight so appalling.Lord Balveny was for a moment stupified, and then
exclaimed, "This may be glamour!hang him over the battlements, quick
or dead.If his foul spirit hath only withdrawn for a space, it shall
return to a body with a dislocated neck."Ramorny and Bonthron were then ordered for
execution.The last was hanged before he seemed quite to comprehend what
was designed to be done with him.Ramorny, pale as death, yet with
the same spirit of pride which had occasioned his ruin, pleaded his
knighthood, and demanded the privilege of dying by decapitation by the
sword, and not by the noose."The Douglas never alters his doom," said Balveny."But thou shalt have
all thy rights.The menial whom he called appeared at his summons."What shakest thou for, fellow?"said Balveny; "here, strike me this
man's gilt spurs from his heels with thy cleaver.And now, John Ramorny,
thou art no longer a knight, but a knave.To the halter with him,
provost marshal!hang him betwixt his companions, and higher than them
if it may be."In a quarter of an hour afterwards, Balveny descended to tell the
Douglas that the criminals were executed."Then there is no further use in the trial," said the Earl."How say
you, good men of inquest, were these men guilty of high treason--ay or
no?""Guilty," exclaimed the obsequious inquest, with edifying unanimity, "we
need no farther evidence.""Sound trumpets, and to horse then, with our own train only; and let
each man keep silence on what has chanced here, until the proceedings
shall be laid before the King, which cannot conveniently be till the
battle of Palm Sunday shall be fought and ended.Select our attendants,
and tell each man who either goes with us or remains behind that he who
prates dies."In a few minutes the Douglas was on horseback, with the followers
selected to attend his person.Expresses were sent to his daughter, the
widowed Duchess of Rothsay, directing her to take her course to Perth,
by the shores of Lochleven, without approaching Falkland, and committing
to her charge Catharine Glover and the glee woman, as persons whose
safety he tendered.As they rode through the forest, they looked back, and beheld the three
bodies hanging, like specks darkening the walls of the old castle."The hand is punished," said Douglas, "but who shall arraign the head by
whose direction the act was done?""I do, kinsman; and were I to listen to the dictates of my heart, I
would charge him with the deed, which I am certain he has authorised.But there is no proof of it beyond strong suspicion, and Albany has
attached to himself the numerous friends of the house of Stuart, to
whom, indeed, the imbecility of the King and the ill regulated habits
of Rothsay left no other choice of a leader.Were I, therefore, to break
the bond which I have so lately formed with Albany, the consequence
must be civil war, an event ruinous to poor Scotland while threatened
by invasion from the activity of the Percy, backed by the treachery
of March.No, Balveny, the punishment of Albany must rest with Heaven,
which, in its own good time, will execute judgment on him and on his
house."The hour is nigh: now hearts beat high;
     Each sword is sharpen'd well;
     And who dares die, who stoops to fly,
     Tomorrow's light shall tell.We are now to recall to our reader's recollection, that Simon Glover and
his fair daughter had been hurried from their residence without having
time to announce to Henry Smith either their departure or the alarming
cause of it.When, therefore, the lover appeared in Curfew Street, on
the morning of their flight, instead of the hearty welcome of the honest
burgher, and the April reception, half joy half censure, which he had
been promised on the part of his lovely daughter, he received only the
astounding intelligence, that her father and she had set off early, on
the summons of a stranger, who had kept himself carefully muffled from
observation.To this, Dorothy, whose talents for forestalling evil, and
communicating her views of it, are known to the reader, chose to add,
that she had no doubt her master and young mistress were bound for the
Highlands, to avoid a visit which had been made since their departure by
two or three apparitors, who, in the name of a Commission appointed by
the King, had searched the house, put seals upon such places as were
supposed to contain papers, and left citations for father and daughter
to appear before the Court of Commission, on a day certain, under pain
of outlawry.All these alarming particulars Dorothy took care to state
in the gloomiest colours, and the only consolation which she afforded
the alarmed lover was, that her master had charged her to tell him to
reside quietly at Perth, and that he should soon hear news of them.This
checked the smith's first resolve, which was to follow them instantly to
the Highlands, and partake the fate which they might encounter.But when he recollected his repeated feuds with divers of the Clan
Quhele, and particularly his personal quarrel with Conachar, who was now
raised to be a high chief, he could not but think, on reflection, that
his intrusion on their place of retirement was more likely to disturb
the safety which they might otherwise enjoy there than be of any service
to them.He was well acquainted with Simon's habitual intimacy with
the chief of the Clan Quhele, and justly augured that the glover would
obtain protection, which his own arrival might be likely to disturb,
while his personal prowess could little avail him in a quarrel with
a whole tribe of vindictive mountaineers.At the same time his heart
throbbed with indignation, when he thought of Catharine being within the
absolute power of young Conachar, whose rivalry he could not doubt, and
who had now so many means of urging his suit.What if the young chief
should make the safety of the father depend on the favour of the
daughter?He distrusted not Catharine's affections, but then her mode
of thinking was so disinterested, and her attachment to her father so
tender, that, if the love she bore her suitor was weighed against his
security, or perhaps his life, it was matter of deep and awful doubt
whether it might not be found light in the balance.Tormented by
thoughts on which we need not dwell, he resolved nevertheless to
remain at home, stifle his anxiety as he might, and await the promised
intelligence from the old man.It came, but it did not relieve his
concern.Sir Patrick Charteris had not forgotten his promise to communicate to
the smith the plans of the fugitives.But, amid the bustle occasioned by
the movement of troops, he could not himself convey the intelligence.He therefore entrusted to his agent, Kitt Henshaw, the task of making it
known.But this worthy person, as the reader knows, was in the interest
of Ramorny, whose business it was to conceal from every one, but
especially from a lover so active and daring as Henry, the real place of
Catharine's residence.Henshaw therefore announced to the anxious smith
that his friend the glover was secure in the Highlands; and though he
affected to be more reserved on the subject of Catharine, he said little
to contradict the belief that she as well as Simon shared the protection
of the Clan Quhele.But he reiterated, in the name of Sir Patrick,
assurances that father and daughter were both well, and that Henry would
best consult his own interest and their safety by remaining quiet and
waiting the course of events.With an agonized heart, therefore, Henry Gow determined to remain quiet
till he had more certain intelligence, and employed himself in finishing
a shirt of mail, which he intended should be the best tempered and the
most finely polished that his skilful hands had ever executed.This
exercise of his craft pleased him better than any other occupation which
he could have adopted, and served as an apology for secluding himself
in his workshop, and shunning society, where the idle reports which were
daily circulated served only to perplex and disturb him.He resolved to
trust in the warm regard of Simon, the faith of his daughter, and the
friendship of the provost, who, having so highly commended his valour
in the combat with Bonthron, would never, he thought, desert him at this
extremity of his fortunes.Time, however, passed on day by day; and
it was not till Palm Sunday was near approaching, that Sir Patrick
Charteris, having entered the city to make some arrangements for the
ensuing combat, bethought himself of making a visit to the Smith of the
Wynd.He entered his workshop with an air of sympathy unusual to him, and
which made Henry instantly augur that he brought bad news.The smith
caught the alarm, and the uplifted hammer was arrested in its descent
upon the heated iron, while the agitated arm that wielded it, strong
before as that of a giant, became so powerless, that it was with
difficulty Henry was able to place the weapon on the ground, instead of
dropping it from his hand."My poor Henry," said Sir Patrick, "I bring you but cold news; they are
uncertain, however, and, if true, they are such as a brave man like you
should not take too deeply to heart.""In God's name, my lord," said Henry, "I trust you bring no evil news of
Simon Glover or his daughter?""Touching themselves," said Sir Patrick, "no: they are safe and well.But as to thee, Henry, my tidings are more cold.Kitt Henshaw has, I
think, apprised thee that I had endeavoured to provide Catharine Glover
with a safe protection in the house of an honourable lady, the Duchess
of Rothsay.But she hath declined the charge, and Catharine hath been
sent to her father in the Highlands.Thou
mayest have heard that Gilchrist MacIan is dead, and that his son
Eachin, who was known in Perth as the apprentice of old Simon, by the
name of Conachar, is now the chief of Clan Quhele; and I heard from one
of my domestics that there is a strong rumour among the MacIans that the
young chief seeks the hand of Catharine in marriage.My domestic learned
this--as a secret, however--while in the Breadalbane country, on some
arrangements touching the ensuing combat.The thing is uncertain but,
Henry, it wears a face of likelihood.""Did your lordship's servant see Simon Glover and his daughter?"said
Henry, struggling for breath, and coughing, to conceal from the provost
the excess of his agitation."He did not," said Sir Patrick; "the Highlanders seemed jealous, and
refused to permit him to speak to the old man, and he feared to alarm
them by asking to see Catharine.Besides, he talks no Gaelic, nor had
his informer much English, so there may be some mistake in the matter.Nevertheless, there is such a report, and I thought it best to tell it
you.But you may be well assured that the wedding cannot go on till the
affair of Palm Sunday be over; and I advise you to take no step till we
learn the circumstances of the matter, for certainty is most desirable,
even when it is painful.Go you to the council house," he added, after a
pause, "to speak about the preparations for the lists in the North Inch?"Well, Smith, I judge by your brief answer that you are discomposed with
this matter; but, after all, women are weathercocks, that is the truth
on't.Solomon and others have proved it before you."And so Sir Patrick Charteris retired, fully convinced he had discharged
the office of a comforter in the most satisfactory manner.With very different impressions did the unfortunate lover regard the
tidings and listen to the consoling commentary."The provost," he said bitterly to himself, "is an excellent man; marry,
he holds his knighthood so high, that, if he speaks nonsense, a poor man
must hold it sense, as he must praise dead ale if it be handed to him
in his lordship's silver flagon.How would all this sound in another
situation?Suppose I were rolling down the steep descent of the
Corrichie Dhu, and before I came to the edge of the rock, comes my Lord
Provost, and cries: 'Henry, there is a deep precipice, and I grieve to
say you are in the fair way of rolling over it.But be not downcast,
for Heaven may send a stone or a bush to stop your progress.However, I
thought it would be comfort to you to know the worst, which you will
be presently aware of.I do not know how many hundred feet deep the
precipice descends, but you may form a judgment when you are at the
bottom, for certainty is certainty.when come you to take
a game at bowls?'And this gossip is to serve instead of any friendly
attempt to save the poor wight's neck!When I think of this, I could go
mad, seize my hammer, and break and destroy all around me.But I will
be calm; and if this Highland kite, who calls himself a falcon, should
stoop at my turtle dove, he shall know whether a burgess of Perth can
draw a bow or not."It was now the Thursday before the fated Palm Sunday, and the champions
on either side were expected to arrive the next day, that they might
have the interval of Saturday to rest, refresh themselves, and prepare
for the combat.Two or three of each of the contending parties were
detached to receive directions about the encampment of their little
band, and such other instructions as might be necessary to the proper
ordering of the field.Henry was not, therefore, surprised at seeing a
tall and powerful Highlander peering anxiously about the wynd in which
he lived, in the manner in which the natives of a wild country examine
the curiosities of one that is more civilized.The smith's heart rose
against the man on account of his country, to which our Perth burgher
bore a natural prejudice, and more especially as he observed the
individual wear the plaid peculiar to the Clan Quhele.The sprig of oak
leaves, worked in silk, intimated also that the individual was one
of those personal guards of young Eachin, upon whose exertions in the
future battle so much reliance was placed by those of their clan.Having observed so much, Henry withdrew into his smithy, for the sight
of the man raised his passion; and, knowing that the Highlander came
plighted to a solemn combat, and could not be the subject of any
inferior quarrel, he was resolved at least to avoid friendly intercourse
with him.In a few minutes, however, the door of the smithy flew open,
and flattering in his tartans, which greatly magnified his actual size,
the Gael entered with the haughty step of a man conscious of a personal
dignity superior to anything which he is likely to meet with.He stood
looking around him, and seemed to expect to be received with courtesy
and regarded with wonder.But Henry had no sort of inclination to
indulge his vanity and kept hammering away at a breastplate which was
lying upon his anvil as if he were not aware of his visitor's presence.(the bandy legged smith), said the Highlander."Those that wish to be crook backed call me so," answered Henry."No offence meant," said the Highlander; "but her own self comes to buy
an armour.""Her own self's bare shanks may trot hence with her," answered Henry; "I
have none to sell.""If it was not within two days of Palm Sunday, herself would make you
sing another song," retorted the Gael."And being the day it is," said Henry, with the same contemptuous
indifference, "I pray you to stand out of my light.""You are an uncivil person; but her own self is fir nan ord too; and she
knows the smith is fiery when the iron is hot.""If her nainsell be hammer man herself, her nainsell may make her nain
harness," replied Henry."And so her nainsell would, and never fash you for the matter; but it
is said, Gow Chrom, that you sing and whistle tunes over the swords and
harnishes that you work, that have power to make the blades cut steel
links as if they were paper, and the plate and mail turn back steel
lances as if they were boddle prins?""They tell your ignorance any nonsense that Christian men refuse to
believe," said Henry."I whistle at my work whatever comes uppermost,
like an honest craftsman, and commonly it is the Highlandman's 'Och hone
for Houghman stares!'"Friend, it is but idle to spur a horse when his legs are ham shackled,"
said the Highlander, haughtily."Her own self cannot fight even now, and
there is little gallantry in taunting her thus.""By nails and hammer, you are right there," said the smith, altering his
tone."But speak out at once, friend, what is it thou wouldst have of
me?I am in no humour for dallying.""A hauberk for her chief, Eachin MacIan," said the Highlander."You are a hammer man, you say?said our
smith, producing from a chest the mail shirt on which he had been lately
employed.The Gael handled it with a degree of admiration which had something of
envy in it.He looked curiously at every part of its texture, and at
length declared it the very best piece of armour that he had ever seen."A hundred cows and bullocks and a good drift of sheep would be e'en
ower cheap an offer," said the Highlandman, by way of tentative; "but
her nainsell will never bid thee less, come by them how she can.""It is a fair proffer," replied Henry; "but gold nor gear will never buy
that harness.I want to try my own sword on my own armour, and I will
not give that mail coat to any one but who will face me for the best of
three blows and a thrust in the fair field; and it is your chief's upon
these terms.""Hut, prut, man--take a drink and go to bed," said the Highlander, in
great scorn.Think ye the captain of the Clan Quhele will
be brawling and battling with a bit Perth burgess body like you?Whisht,
man, and hearken.Her nainsell will do ye mair credit than ever belonged
to your kin.She will fight you for the fair harness hersell.""She must first show that she is my match," said Henry, with a grim
smile.I, one of Eachin MacIan's leichtach, and not your match!""You may try me, if you will.Do you know
how to cast a sledge hammer?""Ay, truly--ask the eagle if he can fly over Farragon.""But before you strive with me, you must first try a cast with one of my
leichtach.Here, Dunter, stand forth for the honour of Perth!And now,
Highlandman, there stands a row of hammers; choose which you will, and
let us to the garden."The Highlander whose name was Norman nan Ord, or Norman of the Hammer,
showed his title to the epithet by selecting the largest hammer of the
set, at which Henry smiled.Dunter, the stout journeyman of the smith,
made what was called a prodigious cast; but the Highlander, making a
desperate effort, threw beyond it by two or three feet, and looked with
an air of triumph to Henry, who again smiled in reply.said the Gael, offering our smith the hammer."Not with that child's toy," said Henry, "which has scarce weight to
fly against the wind.Jannekin, fetch me Sampson; or one of you help the
boy, for Sampson is somewhat ponderous."The hammer now produced was half as heavy again as that which the
Highlander had selected as one of unusual weight.Norman stood
astonished; but he was still more so when Henry, taking his position,
swung the ponderous implement far behind his right haunch joint, and
dismissed it from his hand as if it had flown from a warlike engine.The
air groaned and whistled as the mass flew through it.Down at length it
came, and the iron head sunk a foot into the earth, a full yard beyond
the cast of Norman.The Highlander, defeated and mortified, went to the spot where the
weapon lay, lifted it, poised it in his hand with great wonder, and
examined it closely, as if he expected to discover more in it than a
common hammer.He at length returned it to the owner with a melancholy
smile, shrugging his shoulders and shaking his head as the smith asked
him whether he would not mend his cast."Norman has lost too much at the sport already," he replied."She has
lost her own name of the Hammerer.But does her own self, the Gow Chrom,
work at the anvil with that horse's load of iron?""You shall see, brother," said Henry, leading the way to the smithy."Dunter," he said, "rax me that bar from the furnace"; and uplifting
Sampson, as he called the monstrous hammer, he plied the metal with a
hundred strokes from right to left--now with the right hand, now with
the left, now with both, with so much strength at once and dexterity,
that he worked off a small but beautifully proportioned horseshoe in
half the time that an ordinary smith would have taken for the same
purpose, using a more manageable implement.said the Highlander, "and what for would you be fighting
with our young chief, who is far above your standard, though you were
the best smith ever wrought with wind and fire?"said Henry; "you seem a good fellow, and I'll tell you the
truth.Your master has wronged me, and I give him this harness freely
for the chance of fighting him myself.""Nay, if he hath wronged you he must meet you," said the life guardsman."To do a man wrong takes the eagle's feather out of the chief's bonnet;
and were he the first in the Highlands, and to be sure so is Eachin,
he must fight the man he has wronged, or else a rose falls from his
chaplet.""Will you move him to this," said Henry, "after the fight on Sunday?""Oh, her nainsell will do her best, if the hawks have not got her
nainsell's bones to pick; for you must know, brother, that Clan
Chattan's claws pierce rather deep.""The armour is your chief's on that condition," said Henry; "but I will
disgrace him before king and court if he does not pay me the price.""Deil a fear--deil a fear; I will bring him in to the barrace myself,"
said Norman, "assuredly.""You will do me a pleasure," replied Henry; "and that you may remember
your promise, I will bestow on you this dirk.Look--if you hold it
truly, and can strike between the mail hood and the collar of your
enemy, the surgeon will be needless."The Highlander was lavish in his expressions of gratitude, and took his
leave."I have given him the best mail harness I ever wrought," said the smith
to himself, rather repenting his liberality, "for the poor chance
that he will bring his chief into a fair field with me; and then let
Catharine be his who can win her fairly.But much I dread the youth will
find some evasion, unless he have such luck on Palm Sunday as may induce
him to try another combat.That is some hope, however; for I have often,
ere now, seen a raw young fellow shoot up after his first fight from a
dwarf into a giant queller."Thus, with little hope, but with the most determined resolution, Henry
Smith awaited the time that should decide his fate.What made him augur
the worst was the silence both of the glover and of his daughter."They are ashamed," he said, "to confess the truth to me, and therefore
they are silent."Upon the Friday at noon, the two bands of thirty men each, representing
the contending clans, arrived at the several points where they were to
halt for refreshments.The Clan Quhele was entertained hospitably at the rich abbey of Scone,
while the provost regaled their rivals at his Castle of Kinfauns, the
utmost care being taken to treat both parties with the most punctilious
attention, and to afford neither an opportunity of complaining of
partiality.All points of etiquette were, in the mean while, discussed
and settled by the Lord High Constable Errol and the young Earl of
Crawford, the former acting on the part of the Clan Chattan and the
latter patronising the Clan Quhele.Messengers were passing continually
from the one earl to the other, and they held more than: six meetings
within thirty hours, before the ceremonial of the field could be exactly
arranged.Meanwhile, in case of revival of ancient quarrel, many seeds of
which existed betwixt the burghers and their mountain neighbours, a
proclamation commanded the citizens not to approach within half a mile
of the place where the Highlanders were quartered; while on their part
the intended combatants were prohibited from approaching Perth without
special license.Troops were stationed to enforce this order, who did
their charge so scrupulously as to prevent Simon Glover himself, burgess
and citizen of Perth, from approaching the town, because he owned having
come thither at the same time with the champions of Eachin MacIan, and
wore a plaid around him of their check or pattern.This interruption
prevented Simon from seeking out Henry Wynd and possessing him with a
true knowledge of all that had happened since their separation, which
intercourse, had it taken place, must have materially altered the
catastrophe of our narrative.On Saturday afternoon another arrival took place, which interested the
city almost as much as the preparations for the expected combat.This
was the approach of the Earl Douglas, who rode through the town with a
troop of only thirty horse, but all of whom were knights and gentlemen
of the first consequence.Men's eyes followed this dreaded peer as they
pursue the flight of an eagle through the clouds, unable to ken the
course of the bird of Jove yet silent, attentive, and as earnest in
observing him as if they could guess the object for which he sweeps
through the firmament; He rode slowly through the city, and passed out
at the northern gate.He next alighted at the Dominican convent and
desired to see the Duke of Albany.The Earl was introduced instantly,
and received by the Duke with a manner which was meant to be graceful
and conciliatory, but which could not conceal both art and inquietude.When the first greetings were over, the Earl said with great gravity:
"I bring you melancholy news.Your Grace's royal nephew, the Duke of
Rothsay, is no more, and I fear hath perished by some foul practices."said the Duke' in confusion--"what practices?Who dared
practise on the heir of the Scottish throne?""'Tis not for me to state how these doubts arise," said Douglas; "but
men say the eagle was killed with an arrow fledged from his own wing,
and the oak trunk rent by a wedge of the same wood.""Earl of Douglas," said the Duke of Albany, "I am no reader of riddles.""Nor am I a propounder of them," said Douglas, haughtily, "Your Grace
will find particulars in these papers worthy of perusal.I will go for
half an hour to the cloister garden, and then rejoin you.""You go not to the King, my lord?""No," answered Douglas; "I trust your Grace will agree with me that we
should conceal this great family misfortune from our sovereign till the
business of tomorrow be decided.""If the King heard of this loss, he
could not witness the combat; and if he appear not in person, these men
are likely to refuse to fight, and the whole work is cast loose.But
I pray you sit down, my lord, while I read these melancholy papers
respecting poor Rothsay."He passed the papers through his hands, turning some over with a hasty
glance, and dwelling on others as if their contents had been of the
last importance.When he had spent nearly a quarter of an hour in this
manner, he raised his eyes, and said very gravely: "My lord, in these
most melancholy documents, it is yet a comfort to see nothing which can
renew the divisions in the King's councils, which were settled by the
last solemn agreement between your lordship and myself.My unhappy
nephew was by that agreement to be set aside, until time should send him
a graver judgment.He is now removed by Fate, and our purpose in that
matter is anticipated and rendered unnecessary.""If your Grace," replied the Earl, "sees nothing to disturb the good
understanding which the tranquillity and safety of Scotland require
should exist between us, I am not so ill a friend of my country as to
look closely for such.""I understand you, my Lord of Douglas," said Albany, eagerly."You
hastily judged that I should be offended with your lordship for
exercising your powers of lieutenancy, and punishing the detestable
murderers within my territory of Falkland.Credit me, on the contrary, I
am obliged to your lordship for taking out of my hands the punishment of
these wretches, as it would have broken my heart even to have looked
on them.The Scottish Parliament will inquire, doubtless, into this
sacrilegious deed; and happy am I that the avenging sword has been
in the hand of a man so important as your lordship.Our communication
together, as your lordship must well recollect, bore only concerning a
proposed restraint of my unfortunate nephew until the advance of a year
or two had taught him discretion?""Such was certainly your Grace's purpose, as expressed to me," said the
Earl; "I can safely avouch it.""Why, then, noble earl, we cannot be censured because villains, for
their own revengeful ends, appear to have engrafted a bloody termination
on our honest purpose?""The Parliament will judge it after their wisdom," said Douglas."For my
part, my conscience acquits me.""And mine assoilzies me," said the Duke with solemnity."Now, my lord,
touching the custody of the boy James, who succeeds to his father's
claims of inheritance?""The King must decide it," said Douglas, impatient of the conference."I will consent to his residence anywhere save at Stirling, Doune, or
Falkland.""He is gone," muttered the crafty Albany, "and he must be my ally, yet
feels himself disposed to be my mortal foe.No matter, Rothsay sleeps
with his fathers, James may follow in time, and then--a crown is the
recompense of my perplexities."Thretty for thretty faucht in barreris,
     At Sanct Johnstoun on a day besyde the black freris.At an earlier period of the Christian Church,
the use of any of the days of Passion Week for the purpose of combat
would have been accounted a profanity worthy of excommunication.The
Church of Rome, to her infinite honour, had decided that during the holy
season of Easter, when the redemption of man from his fallen state was
accomplished, the sword of war should be sheathed, and angry monarchs
should respect the season termed the Truce of God.The ferocious
violence of the latter wars betwixt Scotland and England had destroyed
all observance of this decent and religious Ordinance.Very often the
most solemn occasions were chosen by one party for an attack, because
they hoped to find the other engaged in religious duties and unprovided
for defence.Thus the truce, once considered as proper to the season,
had been discontinued; and it became not unusual even to select the
sacred festivals of the church for decision of the trial by combat, to
which this intended contest bore a considerable resemblance.On the present occasion, however, the duties of the day were observed
with the usual solemnity, and the combatants themselves took share in
them.Bearing branches of yew in their hands, as the readiest substitute
for palm boughs, they marched respectively to the Dominican and
Carthusian convents, to hear High Mass, and, by a show at least of
devotion, to prepare themselves for the bloody strife of the day.Great
care had of course been taken that, during this march, they should not
even come within the sound of each other's bagpipes; for it was certain
that, like game cocks exchanging mutual notes of defiance, they would
have sought out and attacked each other before they arrived at the place
of combat.The citizens of Perth crowded to see the unusual procession on the
streets, and thronged the churches where the two clans attended their
devotions, to witness their behaviour, and to form a judgment from
their appearance which was most likely to obtain the advantage in
the approaching conflict.Their demeanour in the church, although not
habitual frequenters of places of devotion, was perfectly decorous; and,
notwithstanding their wild and untamed dispositions, there were few of
the mountaineers who seemed affected either with curiosity or wonder.They appeared to think it beneath their dignity of character to testify
either curiosity or surprise at many things which were probably then
presented to them for the first time.On the issue of the combat, few even of the most competent judges dared
venture a prediction; although the great size of Torquil and his eight
stalwart sons induced some who professed themselves judges of the thewes
and sinews of men to incline to ascribe the advantage to the party of
the Clan Quhele.The opinion of the female sex was much decided by
the handsome form, noble countenance, and gallant demeanour of Eachin
MacIan.There were more than one who imagined they had recollection
of his features, but his splendid military attire rendered the humble
glover's apprentice unrecognisable in the young Highland chief, saving
by one person.That person, as may well be supposed, was the Smith of the Wynd, who
had been the foremost in the crowd that thronged to see the gallant
champions of Clan Quhele.It was with mingled feelings of dislike,
jealousy, and something approaching to admiration that he saw the
glover's apprentice stripped of his mean slough, and blazing forth as a
chieftain, who, by his quick eye and gallant demeanour, the noble shape
of his brow and throat, his splendid arms and well proportioned limbs,
seemed well worthy to hold the foremost rank among men selected to live
or die for the honour of their race.The smith could hardly think that
he looked upon the same passionate boy whom he had brushed off as
he might a wasp that stung him, and, in mere compassion, forebore to
despatch by treading on him."He looks it gallantly with my noble hauberk," thus muttered Henry to
himself, "the best I ever wrought.Yet, if he and I stood together where
there was neither hand to help nor eye to see, by all that is blessed in
this holy church, the good harness should return to its owner!All that
I am worth would I give for three fair blows on his shoulders to undo my
own best work; but such happiness will never be mine.If he escape from
the conflict, it will be with so high a character for courage, that he
may well disdain to put his fortune, in its freshness, to the risk of
an encounter with a poor burgess like myself.He will fight by his
champion, and turn me over to my fellow craftsman the hammerer, when all
I can reap will be the pleasure of knocking a Highland bullock on the
head.I will to the other church in
quest of him, since for sure he must have come down from the Highlands."The congregation was moving from the church of the Dominicans when the
smith formed this determination, which he endeavoured to carry into
speedy execution, by thrusting through the crowd as hastily as the
solemnity of the place and occasion would permit.In making his way
through the press, he was at one instant carried so close to Eachin
that their eyes encountered.The smith's hardy and embrowned countenance
 up like the heated iron on which he wrought, and retained
its dark red hue for several minutes.Eachin's features glowed with a
brighter blush of indignation, and a glance of fiery hatred was shot
from his eyes.But the sudden flush died away in ashy paleness, and his
gaze instantly avoided the unfriendly but steady look with which it was
encountered.Torquil, whose eye never quitted his foster son, saw his emotion, and
looked anxiously around to discover the cause.But Henry was already
at a distance, and hastening on his way to the Carthusian convent.Here
also the religious service of the day was ended; and those who had so
lately borne palms in honour of the great event which brought peace
on earth and goodwill to the children of men were now streaming to
the place of combat--some prepared to take the lives of their fellow
creatures or to lose their own, others to view the deadly strife with
the savage delight which the heathens took in the contests of their
gladiators.The crowd was so great that any other person might well have despaired
of making way through it.But the general deference entertained for
Henry of the Wynd, as the champion of Perth, and the universal sense of
his ability to force a passage, induced all to unite in yielding room
for him, so that he was presently quite close to the warriors of the
Clan Chattan.Their pipers marched at the head of their column.Next
followed the well known banner, displaying a mountain cat rampant, with
the appropriate caution, "Touch not the cat, but (i.e.The chief followed with his two handed sword advanced, as if to
protect the emblem of the tribe.He was a man of middle stature, more
than fifty years old, but betraying neither in features nor form any
decay of strength or symptoms of age.His dark red close curled locks
were in part chequered by a few grizzled hairs, but his step and gesture
were as light in the dance, in the chase, or in the battle as if he had
not passed his thirtieth year.His grey eye gleamed with a wild light
expressive of valour and ferocity mingled; but wisdom and experience
dwelt on the expression of his forehead, eyebrows, and lips.The chosen
champions followed by two and two.There was a cast of anxiety on
several of their faces, for they had that morning discovered the absence
of one of their appointed number; and, in a contest so desperate as was
expected, the loss seemed a matter of importance to all save to their
high mettled chief, MacGillie Chattanach."Say nothing to the Saxons of his absence," said this bold leader, when
the diminution of his force was reported to him."The false Lowland
tongues might say that one of Clan Chattan was a coward, and perhaps
that the rest favoured his escape, in order to have a pretence to avoid
the battle.I am sure that Ferquhard Day will be found in the ranks ere
we are ready for battle; or, if he should not, am not I man enough for
two of the Clan Quhele?or would we not fight them fifteen to thirty,
rather than lose the renown that this day will bring us?"The tribe received the brave speech of their leader with applause, yet
there were anxious looks thrown out in hopes of espying the return of
the deserter; and perhaps the chief himself was the only one of the
determined band who was totally indifferent on the subject.They marched on through the streets without seeing anything of Ferquhard
Day, who, many a mile beyond the mountains, was busied in receiving such
indemnification as successful love could bestow for the loss of honour.MacGillie Chattanach marched on without seeming to observe the absence
of the deserter, and entered upon the North Inch, a beautiful and level
plain, closely adjacent to the city, and appropriated to the martial
exercises of the inhabitants.The plain is washed on one side by the deep and swelling Tay.There was
erected within it a strong palisade, inclosing on three sides a space of
one hundred and fifty yards in length and seventy-four yards in width.The fourth side of the lists was considered as sufficiently fenced
by the river.An amphitheatre for the accommodation of spectators
surrounded the palisade, leaving a large space free to be occupied by
armed men on foot and horseback, and for the more ordinary class of
spectators.At the extremity of the lists which was nearest to the city,
there was a range of elevated galleries for the King and his courtiers,
so highly decorated with rustic treillage, intermingled with gilded
ornaments, that the spot retains to this day the name of the Golden, or
Gilded, Arbour.The mountain minstrelsy, which sounded the appropriate pibrochs or
battle tunes of the rival confederacies, was silent when they entered on
the Inch, for such was the order which had been given.Two stately but
aged warriors, each bearing the banner of his tribe, advanced to the
opposite extremities of the lists, and, pitching their standards into
the earth, prepared to be spectators of a fight in which they were not
to join.The pipers, who were also to be neutral in the strife, took
their places by their respective brattachs.The multitude received both bands with the same general shout with which
on similar occasions they welcome those from whose exertion they expect
amusement, or what they term sport.The destined combatants returned
no answer to this greeting, but each party advanced to the opposite
extremities of the lists, where were entrances by which they were to be
admitted to the interior.A strong body of men at arms guarded either
access; and the Earl Marshal at the one and the Lord High Constable at
the other carefully examined each individual, to see whether he had the
appropriate arms, being steel cap, mail shirt, two handed sword, and
dagger.They also examined the numbers of each party; and great was the
alarm among the multitude when the Earl of Errol held up his hand and
cried: "Ho!The combat cannot proceed, for the Clan Chattan lack one of
their number."said the young Earl of Crawford; "they should have
counted better ere they left home."The Earl Marshal, however, agreed with the Constable that the fight
could not proceed until the inequality should be removed; and a general
apprehension was excited in the assembled multitude that, after all the
preparation, there would be no battle.Of all present there were only two perhaps who rejoiced at the prospect
of the combat being adjourned, and these were the captain of the Clan
Quhele and the tender hearted King Robert.Meanwhile the two chiefs,
each attended by a special friend and adviser, met in the midst of the
lists, having, to assist them in determining what was to be done, the
Earl Marshal, the Lord High Constable, the Earl of Crawford, and Sir
Patrick Charteris.The chief of the Clan Chattan declared himself
willing and desirous of fighting upon the spot, without regard to the
disparity of numbers."That," said Torquil of the Oak, "Clan Quhele will never consent to.You can never win honour from us with the sword, and you seek but a
subterfuge, that you may say when you are defeated, as you know you will
be, that it was for want of the number of your band fully counted out.But I make a proposal: Ferquhard Day was the youngest of your band,
Eachin MacIan is the youngest of ours; we will set him aside in place of
the man who has fled from the combat.""A most unjust and unequal proposal," exclaimed Toshach Beg, the second,
as he might be termed, of MacGillie Chattanach."The life of the chief
is to the clan the breath of our nostrils, nor will we ever consent that
our chief shall be exposed to dangers which the captain of Clan Quhele
does not share."Torquil saw with deep anxiety that his plan was about to fail when the
objection was made to Hector's being withdrawn from the battle, and
he was meditating how to support his proposal, when Eachin himself
interfered.His timidity, it must be observed, was not of that sordid
and selfish nature which induces those who are infected by it calmly
to submit to dishonour rather than risk danger.On the contrary, he was
morally brave, though constitutionally timid, and the shame of avoiding
the combat became at the moment more powerful than the fear of facing
it."I will not hear," he said, "of a scheme which will leave my sword
sheathed during this day's glorious combat.If I am young in arms, there
are enough of brave men around me whom I may imitate if I cannot equal."He spoke these words in a spirit which imposed on Torquil, and perhaps
on the young chief himself."I was sure the foul spell would be broken through, and that the tardy
spirit which besieged him would fly at the sound of the pipe and the
first flutter of the brattach!""Hear me, Lord Marshal," said the Constable."The hour of combat may not
be much longer postponed, for the day approaches to high noon.Let the
chief of Clan Chattan take the half hour which remains, to find, if he
can, a substitute for this deserter; if he cannot, let them fight as
they stand.""Content I am," said the Marshal, "though, as none of his own clan are
nearer than fifty miles, I see not how MacGillis Chattanach is to find
an auxiliary.""That is his business," said the High Constable; "but, if he offers a
high reward, there are enough of stout yeomen surrounding the lists,
who will be glad enough to stretch their limbs in such a game as is
expected.I myself, did my quality and charge permit, would blythely
take a turn of work amongst these wild fellows, and think it fame won."They communicated their decision to the Highlanders, and the chief of
the Clan Chattan replied: "You have judged unpartially and nobly, my
lords, and I deem myself obliged to follow your direction.So make
proclamation, heralds, that, if any one will take his share with Clan
Chattan of the honours and chances of this day, he shall have present
payment of a gold crown, and liberty to fight to the death in my ranks.""You are something chary of your treasure, chief," said the Earl
Marshal: "a gold crown is poor payment for such a campaign as is before
you.""If there be any man willing to fight for honour," replied MacGillis
Chattanach, "the price will be enough; and I want not the service of a
fellow who draws his sword for gold alone."The heralds had made their progress, moving half way round the lists,
stopping from time to time to make proclamation as they had been
directed, without the least apparent disposition on the part of any one
to accept of the proffered enlistment.Some sneered at the poverty of
the Highlanders, who set so mean a price upon such a desperate service.Others affected resentment, that they should esteem the blood of
citizens so lightly.None showed the slightest intention to undertake
the task proposed, until the sound of the proclamation reached Henry of
the Wynd, as he stood without the barrier, speaking from time to time
with Baillie Craigdallie, or rather listening vaguely to what the
magistrate was saying to him."A liberal offer on the part of MacGillie Chattanach," said the host of
the Griffin, "who proposes a gold crown to any one who will turn wildcat
for the day, and be killed a little in his service!exclaimed the smith, eagerly, "do they make proclamation for a
man to fight against the Clan Quhele?""Ay, marry do they," said Griffin; "but I think they will find no such
fools in Perth."He had hardly said the word, when he beheld the smith clear the barriers
at a single bound and alight in the lists, saying: "Here am I, sir
herald, Henry of the Wynd, willing to battle on the part of the Clan
Chattan."A cry of admiration ran through the multitude, while the grave burghers,
not being able to conceive the slightest reason for Henry's behaviour,
concluded that his head must be absolutely turned with the love of
fighting."Thou art mad," he said, "Henry!Thou hast neither two handed sword nor
shirt of mail.""Truly no," said Henry, "for I parted with a mail shirt, which I had
made for myself, to yonder gay chief of the Clan Quhele, who will soon
find on his shoulders with what sort of blows I clink my rivets!As for
two handed sword, why, this boy's brand will serve my turn till I can
master a heavier one.""This must not be," said Errol."Hark thee, armourer, by St.Mary, thou
shalt have my Milan hauberk and good Spanish sword.""I thank your noble earlship, Sir Gilbert Hay, but the yoke with which
your brave ancestor turned the battle at Loncarty would serve my turn
well enough.I am little used to sword or harness that I have not
wrought myself, because I do not well know what blows the one will bear
out without being cracked or the other lay on without snapping."The cry had in the mean while run through the multitude and passed into
the town, that the dauntless smith was about to fight without armour,
when, just as the fated hour was approaching, the shrill voice of a
female was heard screaming for passage through the crowd.The multitude
gave place to her importunity, and she advanced, breathless with haste
under the burden of a mail hauberk and a large two handed sword.The
widow of Oliver Proudfute was soon recognised, and the arms which she
bore were those of the smith himself, which, occupied by her husband on
the fatal evening when he was murdered, had been naturally conveyed
to his house with the dead body, and were now, by the exertions of
his grateful widow, brought to the lists at a moment when such proved
weapons were of the last consequence to their owner.Henry joyfully
received the well known arms, and the widow with trembling haste
assisted in putting them on, and then took leave of him, saying: "God
for the champion of the widow and orphan, and ill luck to all who come
before him!"Confident at feeling himself in his well proved armour, Henry shook
himself as if to settle the steel shirt around him, and, unsheathing
the two handed sword, made it flourish over his head, cutting the air
through which it whistled in the form of the figure eight with an ease
and sleight of hand that proved how powerfully and skilfully he could
wield the ponderous weapon.The champions were now ordered to march
in their turns around the lists, crossing so as to avoid meeting each
other, and making obeisance as they passed the Golden Arbour where the
King was seated.While this course was performing, most of the spectators were again
curiously comparing the stature, limbs, and sinews of the two parties,
and endeavouring to form a conjecture an to the probable issue of the
combat.The feud of a hundred years, with all its acts of aggression
and retaliation, was concentrated in the bosom of each combatant.Their
countenances seemed fiercely writhen into the wildest expression of
pride, hate, and a desperate purpose of fighting to the very last.The spectators murmured a joyful applause, in high wrought expectation
of the bloody game.Wagers were offered and accepted both on the general
issue of the conflict and on the feats of particular champions.The
clear, frank, and elated look of Henry Smith rendered him a general
favourite among the spectators, and odds, to use the modern expression,
were taken that he would kill three of his opponents before he himself
fell.Scarcely was the smith equipped for the combat, when the commands of the
chiefs ordered the champions into their places; and at the same moment
Henry heard the voice of Simon Glover issuing from the crowd, who were
now silent with expectation, and calling on him: "Harry Smith--Harry
Smith, what madness hath possessed thee?""Ay, he wishes to save his hopeful son in law that is, or is to be, from
the smith's handling," was Henry's first thought; his second was to turn
and speak with him; and his third, that he could on no pretext desert
the band which he had joined, or even seem desirous to delay the fight,
consistently with honour.He turned himself, therefore, to the business of the hour.Both parties
were disposed by the respective chiefs in three lines, each containing
ten men.They were arranged with such intervals between each individual
as offered him scope to wield his sword, the blade of which was five
feet long, not including the handle.The second and third lines were
to come up as reserves, in case the first experienced disaster.On the
right of the array of Clan Quhele, the chief, Eachin MacIan, placed
himself in the second line betwixt two of his foster brothers.Four of
them occupied the right of the first line, whilst the father and
two others protected the rear of the beloved chieftain.Torquil, in
particular, kept close behind, for the purpose of covering him.Thus
Eachin stood in the centre of nine of the strongest men of his band,
having four especial defenders in front, one on each hand, and three in
his rear.The line of the Clan Chattan was arranged in precisely the same order,
only that the chief occupied the centre of the middle rank, instead of
being on the extreme right.This induced Henry Smith, who saw in the
opposing bands only one enemy, and that was the unhappy Eachin, to
propose placing himself on the left of the front rank of the Clan
Chattan.But the leader disapproved of this arrangement; and having
reminded Henry that he owed him obedience, as having taken wages at his
hand, he commanded him to occupy the space in the third line immediately
behind himself--a post of honour, certainly, which Henry could not
decline, though he accepted of it with reluctance.When the clans were thus drawn up opposed to each other, they intimated
their feudal animosity and their eagerness to engage by a wild scream,
which, uttered by the Clan Quhele, was answered and echoed back by
the Clan Chattan, the whole at the same time shaking their swords and
menacing each other, as if they meant to conquer the imagination of
their opponents ere they mingled in the actual strife.At this trying moment, Torquil, who had never feared for himself, was
agitated with alarm on the part of his dault, yet consoled by observing
that he kept a determined posture, and that the few words which he spoke
to his clan were delivered boldly, and well calculated to animate them
to combat, as expressing his resolution to partake their fate in death
or victory.The trumpets
of the King sounded a charge, the bagpipes blew up their screaming and
maddening notes, and the combatants, starting forward in regular order,
and increasing their pace till they came to a smart run, met together
in the centre of the ground, as a furious land torrent encounters an
advancing tide.For an instant or two the front lines, hewing at each other with their
long swords, seemed engaged in a succession of single combats; but the
second and third ranks soon came up on either side, actuated alike by
the eagerness of hatred and the thirst of honour, pressed through the
intervals, and rendered the scene a tumultuous chaos, over which the
huge swords rose and sunk, some still glittering, others streaming with
blood, appearing, from the wild rapidity with which they were swayed,
rather to be put in motion by some complicated machinery than to
be wielded by human hands.Some of the combatants, too much crowded
together to use those long weapons, had already betaken themselves to
their poniards, and endeavoured to get within the sword sweep of those
opposed to them.In the mean time, blood flowed fast, and the groans of
those who fell began to mingle with the cries of those who fought; for,
according to the manner of the Highlanders at all times, they could
hardly be said to shout, but to yell.Those of the spectators whose
eyes were best accustomed to such scenes of blood and confusion could
nevertheless discover no advantage yet acquired by either party.The
conflict swayed, indeed, at different intervals forwards or backwards,
but it was only in momentary superiority, which the party who acquired
it almost instantly lost by a corresponding exertion on the other side.The wild notes of the pipers were still heard above the tumult, and
stimulated to farther exertions the fury of the combatants.At once, however, and as if by mutual agreement, the instruments sounded
a retreat; it was expressed in wailing notes, which seemed to imply a
dirge for the fallen.The two parties disengaged themselves from each
other, to take breath for a few minutes.The eyes of the spectators
greedily surveyed the shattered array of the combatants as they drew
off from the contest, but found it still impossible to decide which had
sustained the greater loss.It seemed as if the Clan Chattan had lost
rather fewer men than their antagonists; but in compensation, the bloody
plaids and skirts of their party (for several on both sides had thrown
their mantles away) showed more wounded men than the Clan Quhele.About
twenty of both sides lay on the field dead or dying; and arms and legs
lopped off, heads cleft to the chin, slashes deep through the shoulder
into the breast, showed at once the fury of the combat, the ghastly
character of the weapons used, and the fatal strength of the arms which
wielded them.The chief of the Clan Chattan had behaved himself with
the most determined courage, and was slightly wounded.Eachin also had
fought with spirit, surrounded by his bodyguard.His sword was bloody,
his bearing bold and warlike; and he smiled when old Torquil, folding
him in his arms, loaded him with praises and with blessings.The two chiefs, after allowing their followers to breathe for the space
of about ten minutes, again drew up in their files, diminished by nearly
one third of their original number.They now chose their ground nearer
to the river than that on which they had formerly encountered, which
was encumbered with the wounded and the slain.Some of the former were
observed, from time to time, to raise themselves to gain a glimpse of
the field, and sink back, most of them to die from the effusion of blood
which poured from the terrific gashes inflicted by the claymore.Harry Smith was easily distinguished by his Lowland habit, as well as
his remaining on the spot where they had first encountered, where he
stood leaning on a sword beside a corpse, whose bonneted head, carried
to ten yards' distance from the body by the force of the blow which had
swept it off, exhibited the oak leaf, the appropriate ornament of the
bodyguard of Eachin MacIan.Since he slew this man, Henry had not struck
a blow, but had contented himself with warding off many that were dealt
at himself, and some which were aimed at the chief.MacGillie Chattanach
became alarmed, when, having given the signal that his men should again
draw together, he observed that his powerful recruit remained at a
distance from the ranks, and showed little disposition to join them."Can so strong a body have a mean
and cowardly spirit?"You as good as called me hireling but now," replied Henry."If I am
such," pointing to the headless corpse, "I have done enough for my day's
wage.""He that serves me without counting his hours," replied the chief, "I
reward him without reckoning wages.""Then," said the smith, "I fight as a volunteer, and in the post which
best likes me.""All that is at your own discretion," replied MacGillis Chattanach, who
saw the prudence of humouring an auxiliary of such promise."It is enough," said Henry; and, shouldering his heavy weapon, he joined
the rest of the combatants with alacrity, and placed himself opposite to
the chief of the Clan Quhele.It was then, for the first time, that Eachin showed some uncertainty.He had long looked up to Henry as the best combatant which Perth and its
neighbourhood could bring into the lists.His hatred to him as a rival
was mingled with recollection of the ease with which he had once, though
unarmed, foiled his own sudden and desperate attack; and when he beheld
him with his eyes fixed in his direction, the dripping sword in his
hand, and obviously meditating an attack on him individually, his
courage fell, and he gave symptoms of wavering, which did not escape his
foster father.It was lucky for Eachin that Torquil was incapable, from the formation
of his own temper, and that of those with whom he had lived, to conceive
the idea of one of his own tribe, much less of his chief and foster
son, being deficient in animal courage.Could he have imagined this, his
grief and rage might have driven him to the fierce extremity of taking
Eachin's life, to save him from staining his honour.But his mind
rejected the idea that his dault was a personal coward, as something
which was monstrous and unnatural.That he was under the influence of
enchantment was a solution which superstition had suggested, and he now
anxiously, but in a whisper, demanded of Hector: "Does the spell now
darken thy spirit, Eachin?""Yes, wretch that I am," answered the unhappy youth; "and yonder stands
the fell enchanter!"exclaimed Torquil, "and you wear harness of his making?Norman,
miserable boy, why brought you that accursed mail?""If my arrow has flown astray, I can but shoot my life after it,"
answered Norman nan Ord."Stand firm, you shall see me break the spell.""Yes, stand firm," said Torquil."He may be a fell enchanter; but my own
ear has heard, and my own tongue has told, that Eachin shall leave the
battle whole, free, and unwounded; let us see the Saxon wizard who can
gainsay that.He may be a strong man, but the fair forest of the oak
shall fall, stock and bough, ere he lay a finger on my dault.Ring
around him, my sons; bas air son Eachin!"The sons of Torquil shouted back the words, which signify, "Death for
Hector."Encouraged by their devotion, Eachin renewed his spirit, and called
boldly to the minstrels of his clan, "Seid suas" that is, "Strike up."The wild pibroch again sounded the onset; but the two parties approached
each other more slowly than at first, as men who knew and respected
each other's valour.Henry Wynd, in his impatience to begin the contest,
advanced before the Clan Chattan and signed to Eachin to come on.Norman, however, sprang forward to cover his foster brother, and there
was a general, though momentary, pause, as if both parties were willing
to obtain an omen of the fate of the day from the event of this duel.The Highlander advanced, with his large sword uplifted, as in act to
strike; but, just as he came within sword's length, he dropt the long
and cumbrous weapon, leapt lightly over the smith's sword, as he fetched
a cut at him, drew his dagger, and, being thus within Henry's guard,
struck him with the weapon (his own gift) on the side of the throat,
directing the blow downwards into the chest, and calling aloud, at the
same time, "You taught me the stab!"But Henry Wynd wore his own good hauberk, doubly defended with a lining
of tempered steel.Had he been less surely armed, his combats had been
ended for ever.Even as it was, he was slightly wounded.he replied, striking Norman a blow with the pommel of his long
sword, which made him stagger backwards, "you were taught the thrust,
but not the parry"; and, fetching a blow at his antagonist, which cleft
his skull through the steel cap, he strode over the lifeless body to
engage the young chief, who now stood open before him.But the sonorous voice of Torquil thundered out, "Far eil air son
Eachin!"and the two brethren who flanked their
chief on each side thrust forward upon Henry, and, striking both at
once, compelled him to keep the defensive.cried MacGillie Chattanach."Save the
brave Saxon; let these kites feel your talons!"Already much wounded, the chief dragged himself up to the smith's
assistance, and cut down one of the leichtach, by whom he was assailed.Henry's own good sword rid him of the other.answered two more of his
devoted sons, and opposed themselves to the fury of the smith and those
who had come to his aid; while Eachin, moving towards the left wing of
the battle, sought less formidable adversaries, and again, by some show
of valour, revived the sinking hopes of his followers.The two children
of the oak, who had covered, this movement, shared the fate of their
brethren; for the cry of the Clan Chattan chief had drawn to that part
of the field some of his bravest warriors.The sons of Torquil did not
fall unavenged, but left dreadful marks of their swords on the persons
of the dead and living.But the necessity of keeping their most
distinguished soldiers around the person of their chief told to
disadvantage on the general event of the combat; and so few were now
the number who remained fighting, that it was easy to see that the Clan
Chattan had fifteen of their number left, though most of them wounded,
and that of the Clan Quhele only about ten remained, of whom there were
four of the chief's bodyguard, including Torquil himself.They fought and struggled on, however, and as their strength decayed,